Reilly This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www. Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file. King George III 600 A. Preface This was written to appreciate what laws have been in existence for a long time and therefore have proven their success in maintaining a stable society. Its purpose is also to see the historical context in which our legal doctrines developed. This book is a primer. It can serve as an introduction on which to base further reading in English legal history. It defines terms unique to English legal history. Chapter 1 are unknown or inexact. The Times section sets a background and context in which to better understand the law of that period. Christian belief and the change to allowance of loans for interest. The scientific revolution was accepted only slowly. The Law section describes the law governing the behavior and conduct of the populace. In earlier times this is both statutory law and the common law of the courts. Wales after its conquest and statutes on succession rights to the throne. It also contains some examples of cases. There are twenty shillings in a pound. There are twelve pennies or pence in a Norman shilling. Six shillings and two pence is denoted 6s. A scaett was a coin of silver and copper of lesser denomination than a shilling. The sources and reference books from which information was obtained are listed in a bibliography instead of being contained in tedious footnotes. There is no index to pages because the electronic text will print out its pages differently on different computers with different computer settings. The settlement of England goes back thousands of years. They wore animal skins over their bodies for warmth and around their feet for protection when walking. These skins were sewn together with bone needles and threads made from animal sinews. They carried small items by hooking them onto their belts. They wore conical hats of bound rush and lived in rush shelters. They were probably dug with antler picks and wood spades. The people lived in rectangular huts with four wood posts supporting a roof. Cooking was in a clay oven inside or over an open fire on the outside. Water was carried in animal skins or leather pouches from springs lower on the hill up to the settlement. They could more easily be seen from the hill tops. Pathways extended through this camp of huts and for many miles beyond. A wife wore a gold wedding band on the ring finger of her left hand to show that she was married. They also made wool felt and spun and wove wool into a coarse cloth. Flax was grown and woven into a coarse linen cloth. They could tie things with rawhide strips or rope braids they made. Some men brought their hunting dogs on leashes to follow scent trails to the animal. The men threw stones and spears with flint points at the animals. They watched the phases of the moon and learned to predict when it would be full and give the most light for night hunting. This began the concept of a month. Circles of stone like Stonehenge were built with alignments to paths of the moon. A priest officiated over a funeral for a dead man. His wife would often also go on the funeral pyre with him. They drank water from springs. There were eggs of different colors in nests and many hare to eat. The goddess Easter was celebrated at this time. Next in importance were the cattle. Sheep were kept primarily for their wool. Flocks and herds were taken to pastures. The chickens provided eggs. A coarse cloth was woven and worn as a tunic which had been cut from the cloth. Kings wore tunics decorated with sheet gold. Decorated pottery was made from clay and used to hold liquids and for food preparation and consumption. This was the season in which many animals were born and grew to maturity. Wood carts with four wheels were used to transport produce and manure. Horses were used for transportation of people or goods. Clans had settlements near rivers. There was an upright loom in the darkness. The floor was swept clean. At the door were spears or bags of slingstones ready for immediate use. The King lived in the largest hut. Gullies outside carried off excess water. Each hut had a garden for fruit and vegetables. A goat or cow might be tied out of reach of the garden. There was a fence or hedge surrounding and protecting the garden area and dwelling. Buckets and cauldrons which had originated from the Mediterranean were used. Querns with the top circular stone turned by hand over the bottom stone were used for grinding grain. There were ovens to dry and roast grain. Grain was first eaten as a porridge or cereal. There were square wood graneries on stilts and wood racks on which to dry hay. Grain was stored in concealed pits in the earth which were lined with drystone or basketwork or clay and made airtight by sealing with clay or dung. Sowing was by men or two oxen drawing a simple scratch plow. The crops were all harvested in the summer. These fields were usually enclosed with a hedge to keep animals from eating the crop and to define the territory of the settlement from that of its neighbors. Flax was grown and made into linen cloth. Beyond the fields were pastures for cattle and sheep grazing. There was often an area for beehives. This was subsistence level farming. Pottery was given symmetry when formed with use of a wheel and heated in increasingly hot kilns. The deceased was buried in a coffin with a stone on top deep in the earth to keep the spirit of the dead from coming out to haunt the living. Typically one man operated the bellows to keep the fire hot while another did the hammering. The bows and arrows probably evolved from spear throwing rods. Kings in body armor fought with chariots drawn by two horses. The horse harnesses had bronze fittings. There was some glassmaking of beads. Wrought iron bars were used as currency. Later a rampart was added from which sentries could patrol. Timbers were probably transported by carts or dragged by oxen. At the entrances were several openings only one of which really allowed entry. The others went between banks into dead ends and served as traps in which to kill the enemy from above. They could reach to 14 acres. Sometimes champions from each side fought in single combat. The Celts took the heads of those they killed to hang from their belts or place on wood spikes at the gates. Kings sometimes lived in separate palisades where they kept their horses and chariots. So farming gave rise to the concept of a year. Each field was divided into long and narrow strips. These were rotated yearly. There was a newly invented plough that was heavy and made of wood and later had an attached iron blade. This plough was too heavy for two oxen and was pulled by a team of about eight to ten oxen. Each freeman was allotted certain strips in each field to bear crops. The faster horse replaced the ox as the primary work animal. Strips of land for agriculture were added from waste land as the community grew. There were villages which had one or two market days in each week. It was a port for foreign trade. Near the town was Ludhill. Mine shafts were up to thirty feet deep and necessitated the use of chalk lamps fuelled by animal fat with wicks of moss. The flint was hauled up in baskets. Common men and women were now buried in tombs within memorial burial mounds of earth with stone entrances and interior chambers. Celts to believe in reincarnation of the soul after death of one body into another body. They also threw prized possessions into lakes and rivers as sacrifices to water gods. There were different classes of men. Freemen had long hair and beards. Slaves were chained and often traded. Criminals became slaves of the person wronged or of the king. Sometimes a father pressed by need sold his children or his wife into bondage. Children with a slave parent were slaves. There was a hole in the roof to let out the smoke. Richer men drank wine. Physical strength and endurance in adversity were admired traits. Slaves had no legal rights. A lord could kill his slave at will. A wrong done to a slave was regarded as done to his owner. Sometimes people were driven to infanticide or group suicide by jumping together off a cliff or into the water. Several large kingdoms came to replace the many small ones. The people were worshipping pagan gods when St. Augustine came to England in 596 A. The King gave him land where there were ruins of an old city. Augustine used stones from the ruins to build a church which was later called Canterbury. He also built the first St. A succession of princesses went out from Kent to marry other Saxon kings and convert them to Christianity. King AEthelbert did not. The King announced his laws at meetings of his people and his eorls would decide the punishments. There was a fine of 120s. At this time a shilling could buy a cow in Kent or a sheep elsewhere. The penalty for slander was tearing out of the tongue. WHICH KING AETHELBERHT ESTABLISHED IN THE DAYS OF AUGUSTINE 1. Let him who breaks the jaw bone pay for it with 20 shillings. The King and his freemen would hear and decide cases of wrongful behavior such as breach of the peace. Punishment would be given to the offender by the community. He was responsible for keeping the peace of the hundred. The Druid priests decided all disputes of the Celts. A community was usually an extended family. Its members lived a village in which a stone church was the most prominent building. Hangings covered the cracks in the walls to keep the wind out. Smoke from a fire in the middle of the room filtered out of cracks in the roof. Grain was ground at home by rotating by hand one stone disk on another stone disk. Some villages had a mill powered by the flow of water or by horses. These three duties were constant until 1195. Farmland surrounded the villages and was farmed by the community as a whole under the direction of a lord. Silver pennies replaced the smaller scaetts. Everyone in the village went to church on Sunday and brought gifts such as grain to the priest. Local custom determined the amount. The land underneath had been given to the church by former kings and persons who wanted the church to say prayers to help their souls go from purgatory to heaven and who also selected the first priest. Holy water replaced haunted wells and streams. Nuns assisted priests in celebrating mass and administering the sacraments. They alone consecrated new nuns. Vestry meetings were community meetings held for church purposes. A person joined his hands in prayer as if to offer them for binding together in submission. The church baptized babies and officiated or gave blessings at marriage ceremonies. It was thought that putting the name on the grave would assist identification of that person for being taken to heaven. The church heard the last wish or will of the person dying concerning who he wanted to have his property. The church taught that it was not necessary to bury possessions with the deceased. The church taught boys and girls. Every man carried a horn slung on his shoulder as he went about his work so that he could at once send out a warning to his fellow villagers or call them in chasing a thief or other offender. An eorl could call upon the ceorl farmers for about forty days to fight off an invading group. They were also chief magistrates of large jurisdictional areas of land. The king was sometimes accompanied by his wife and sons at the witanagemot. They made determinations of war and peace and directed the army and the fleet. The king wore a crown or royal helmet. He could erect castles and bridges and could provide a special protection to strangers. Violent queens waged wars. Kingdoms were often allied by marriage between their royal families. There were also royal marriages to royalty on the continent. The houses of the wealthy had ornamented silk hangings on the walls. Some had fine white ox horn shaved so thin they were transparent for windows. They slept in bed clothes on pillows stuffed with straw. They used silver mirrors and silver writing pens. They ate from a table covered with a cloth. The wealthy ate wheat bread and others ate barley bread. Ale made from barley was passed around in a cup. Mead made from honey was also drunk. Men often wore a gold ring on the fourth finger of the right hand. Leather shoes were fastened with leather thongs around the ankle. Their hair was parted in the middle and combed down each side in waving ringlets. The clergy did not wear beards. Their long hair was in ringlets and they put rouge on their cheeks. They were often doing needlework. Silk was affordable only by the wealthy. Most families kept a pig and pork was the primary meat. Fowl was obtained by fowlers who trapped them. Pepper and cinnamon were imported. Sometimes a whale was driven into an inlet by a group of boats. Whale skins were used to make ropes. The roads were not much more than trails. They were often so narrow that two pack horses could hardly pass each other. Traveling a far distance was unsafe as there were robbers on the roads. Traveling strangers were distrusted. Herbal mixtures were drunk for sickness and maladies. Each kingdom was split up into dioceses each with one bishop. The bishops came to be the most permanent element of society. They had their sees in villages or rural monasteries. Theodore was the first archbishop whom all the English church obeyed. Theodore discouraged slavery by denying Christian burial to the kidnapper and forbidding the sale of children over the age of seven. A slave became entitled to two loaves a day and to his holydays. From them the people learned the benefit of common national action. Canterbury in the south and one of York in the north. They governed the bishops and could meet with them to issue canons that would be equally valid all over the land. Ink was made from the outer husks of walnuts steeped in vinegar. Northumbria and abbess of one of its monasteries. Several monks taught there later became bishops. Kings and princes often asked her advice. Kings and eorldormen retired to them. Danish Vikings made several invasions in the 800s for which a danegeld tax on land was assessed on everyone every ten to twenty years. The amount was determined by the witan and was typically 2s. A hide was probably the amount of land which could support a family or household for a year or as much land as could be tilled annually by a single plow. The burhs were seminal towns. The shire or local landowners were responsible for repairing the burh fortifications. There were about thirty shires. Alfred had a small navy of longships with 60 oars to fight the Viking longships. Alfred divided his army into two parts so that one half of the men were fighting while the other half was at home sowing and harvesting for those fighting. The witan became mere witnesses. Many free coerls of the older days became bonded. The village community tended to become a large private estate headed by a lord. But the lord does not have the power to encroach upon the rights of common that exist within the community. A mark was probably a Viking denomination and a mark of gold was equal to nine marks of silver in later times and probably in this time. The ironed pleats of Viking clothing indicated a high status of the wearer. Iwerve and 15 hides at Fontmell. The witnesses of this are Edward my son and Archbishop AEthelred and Bishop Ealhferth and Bishop AEthelhead and Earl Wulfhere and Earl Eadwulf and Earl Cuthred and Abbot Tunberht and Milred my thegn and AEthelwulf and Osric and Brihtulf and Cyma. Mary and all the saints of God forever to all eternity. He described the world as like a yolk in the middle of an egg whose shell moves around it. Polar Star was higher in the north and lower in the south. That it was curved from east to west followed from the observation that two clocks placed one west and one east would record a different time for the same eclipse of the moon. Gold is but a stone unless a wise man has it. Many a man loses his soul through silver. Many an apple is bright without and bitter within. With a few words a wise man can compass much. Be not so mad as to tell your friend all your thoughts. Relatives often quarrel together. The barkless dog bites ill. The false one will betray you when you least expect it. He began the practice of dating years from the birth of Christ and believed that the earth was round. Over the earth was a fiery spherical firmament. Above this were the waters of the heavens. Storms were begun by the devil. There were professional story tellers attached to great men. Men usually told oral legends of their own feats and those of their ancestors after supper. Alfred had monasteries rebuilt with learned and moral men heading them. He built a nunnery which was headed by his daughter as prioress. Winchester was still the royal capital town. Aethelflared ruled the country for seven years. She had more fortified burhs built and led soldiers to victories. Under the royalty were the nobles. An earl headed each shire as representative of the King. He led the array of his shire to do battle if the shire was attacked. He executed all royal commands. He presided over the shire court. The office tended to be hereditary. The reeve took security from every person for the maintenance of the public peace. Under the earls were the thegns. Other thegns performed functions of magistrates. He was bound to to service in war by virtue of his landholding instead of by his relationship to the king. The wergeld of a thegn was 1200s. A ceorl typically had a single hide of land. Smallholders made up about two fifths of the population. A cottager had one to five acres of land and depended on others for his living. He might even acquire enough land to qualify him for the witan. They could sue and be sued in the courts. Marriage required the consent of the lady and her friends. It was given to her on the morning after the wedding night. Fraternal guilds were established for mutual advantage and protection. A guild imposed fines for any injury of one member by another member. It assisted in paying any murder fine imposed on a member. It avenged the murder of a member and abided by the consequences. It buried its members and purchased masses for his soul. Mercantile guilds in seaports carried out commercial speculations not possible by the capital of only one person. At the first we teach that it is most needful that every man warily keep his oath and his wed. The word of a bishop and of the king were incontrovertible without an oath. I am the Lord thy God. Love thou not other strange gods above me. Remember that thou hallow the rest day. Commit thou not adultery. Say thou not false witness. Make thou not to thyself golden or silver gods. If he had a wergeld of 600s. If he had a wergeld of 1200s. A boy of ten years may be privy to a theft. An ox which gores someone to death shall be stoned. Cases were held at monthly meetings of the hundred court. A slip or a stammer would mean he lost the case. It was not necessary to drown to be deemed innocent. The results of the ordeal were taken to indicate the will of God. Accused archbishops and bishops could clear themselves with an oath that they were guiltless. King Beornwulf and his bishops and his earls and all the councilors of this nation were assembled. Here are the names and designations of those who were assembled at the council meeting . A breach of the public peace of an earl would occasion a fine. The servi were the slaves. Probably all who were not slaves were freemen. The heriot of a thegn who had soken came to be about 80s. Some thegns had soken or jurisdiction over their own lands and others did not. Free farmers who had sought protection from thegns in time of war now took them as their lords. Every free born person had the right to hunt other game. There was a great expansion of arable land. Some land had been specifically allocated to certain individuals. This land was usually land that had been given to the church or monasteries because church clerics could write. It could also be rented by services to the state via charter. But a distinct act by the king and witan was necessary for this wish to take effect. Ploughs and wagons could be drawn by four or more oxen or horses in sets of two behind each other. Oxenshoes and horseshoes prevented lameness due to cracked hooves. These buildings were surrounded by a bank or stiff hedge. They wore shapeless clothes of goat hair and unprocessed wool from their sheep. Venison was highly prized. They sometimes mated with the domestic pigs which roamed the woodlands. Their intestines provided skin for sausages. Water could be carried in leather bags because leather working preservative techniques improved so that tanning prevented stretching or decaying. Parasitical worms in the stool were ubiquitous. Most of the simple people lived in villages of about 20 homes circling a village green or lining a single winding lane. Almost every village had a watermill. It might be run by water shooting over or flowing under the wheel. Only the wealthy could afford to wear linen or silk. Boots were worn when fighting. They carried knives or axes under metal belts. They could carry items by tying leather pouches onto their belts with their drawstrings. They wore leather gloves for warmth and for heavy working with their hands. Their teeth were very healthy. People in their 50s were deemed venerable. Boys of twelve were considered old enough to swear an oath of allegiance to the king. The lands of the large landholding lords were administered by freemen. Most men did carpentry work. The loan could continue to their widows or children who took up the craft. Mills were usually powered by water. Seeds were held in an apron for seeding. Plants were pruned to direct their growth and to increase their yield. Easter was the biggest feast. There were common lands of these estates as well as of communities. Any proposed new settler had to be admitted at the court of this estate. The land of some lords included fishing villages along the coasts. Sometimes whales were driven into an inlet by many boats. Oysters were so numerous that they were eaten by the poor. Ore was dug from the ground and combined with wood charcoal in a shaft furnace to be smelted into liquid form. Wood charcoal was derived from controlled charring of the wood at high temperatures without using oxygen. The pure iron was extracted from this liquid and formed into bars. There were about fifty markets in the nation. An ox still was worth about 30d. Witnesses were also required for the exchange of property and to vouch for cattle having being born on the property of a person claiming them. Salt was used throughout the nation to preserve meat over the winter. Inland saltworks had an elaborate and specialized organization. The chief one used saltpans and furnaces to extract salt from natural brine springs. Sometimes there were investors in a portion of the works who lived quite at distance away. Peddlers carried salt to sell from village to village. English merchants to be transported to other English seaports. London was a market town on the north side of the Thames River and the primary port and trading center for foreign merchants. There were wooden quays over much of the riverfront. Some had central stone hearths and earth latrines. Goods from the continent were sold at open stalls in certain streets. Furs and slaves were traded. There was a royal levy on exports by foreigners merchants. Southwark was reachable by a bridge. Guilds in London were first associations of neighbors for the purposes of mutual assistance. Both the masses and the feast were attended by the women. Frequently the guilds also had a religious ceremonial to affirm their bonds of fidelity. They readily became connected with the exercise of trades and with the training of apprentices. The devil often was prominent in miracle plays. Many of these London guilds were known by the name of their founding member. They were especially established by bishops and reeves. Members met monthly and contributed about 4d. The members were grouped in tens. Members with horses were to track the thief. Members without horses worked in the place of the absent horseowners until their return. Overwhelming force was used if his kindred tried to protect him. The members of the peace guild also feasted and drank together. And thus he will remain quit of the murder of the deceased towards the king and relatives and lords of the deceased. Every week in London there was a folkmote at St. The folkmoot then had responsibility for order and was the sole authority for proclaiming outlaws. It met three times a year at St. It also yearly arranged the watch and dealt with risks of fire. Each guild became a ward. The chief alderman was the portreeve. Some traders of these merchant guilds became so prosperous that they became landholders. Every merchant who had made three long voyages on his own behalf and at his own cost ranked as a thegn. There were also some craft guilds composed of handicraftsmen or artisans. There were eight moneyers in London. Coins were issued to be of value for only a couple of years. Then one had to exchange them for newly issued ones at a rate of about 10 old for 8 or 9 new. The difference constituted a tax. He kept a royal seal and was the chief royal chaplain. He had the special duty of securing and administering the royal revenue from vacant benefices. Edward wanted to avoid the pressures and dangers of living in the rich and powerful City of London. Westminster about two miles upstream. Royal coronations took place at the abbey. Winchester to supplement his traveling wardrobe. Spanish stallions were imported to improve English horses. It was done in the context of a religious ceremony. The king was the patron of the English church. He gave the church peace and protection. He presided over church councils and appointed bishops. He was so greatly revered that a comet was thought to accompany his death. The king established the office of the Chancery to draft documents and keep records. Great Seal of England which hung from the bottom of the document. The town of Coventry consisted of a large monastery estate and a large private estate headed by a lord. Every man was expected to have a lord to whom he gave fealty. I to him submitted and chose his will. Brothers were also expected to protect their minor kinsmen. Marriages were determined by men asking women to marry them. The couple were then betrothed. Marriage ceremonies were performed by priests in churches. The groom had to bring friends to his wedding as sureties to guarantee his oath to maintain and support his wife and children. The marriage was written into church records. This was the forerunner of the wedding cake. They could even make wills that disinherited their sons. Worcester and the other in the possession of Bishop AEthelstan at Hereford. Here is declared in this document the agreement which Godwine made with Brihtric when he wooed his daughter. Burmarsh and in addition 30 oxen and 20 cows and 10 horses and 10 slaves. Abbot AElfmaer and the community at St. Leofsunu his brother acted as security for all this. And whichever of them lives the longer shall succeed to all the property both in land and everything else which I have given them. Brihtric himself has the third. Nuns and monks lived in segregated nunneries and monasteries on church land and grew their own food. The local bishop usually was also an abbot of a monastery. The priests and nuns wore long robes with loose belts and did not carry weapons. They chanted to pay homage and to communicate with God or his saints. Caring for the sick entailed mostly praying to God as it was thought that only God could cure. They bathed a few times a year. They got their drinking water from upstream of where they had located their latrines over running water. Slavery was diminished by the church by excommunication for the sale of a child over seven. The clergy were to abstain from red meat and wine and were to be celibate. But there were periods of laxity. Punishment was by the cane or scourge. The Archbishop of Canterbury began anointing new kings at the time of coronation to emphasize that the king was ruler by the grace of God. A real Jack Frost nipped noses and fingers and made the ground too hard to work. The forest was the mysterious home of spirits. People prayed to God to help them in their troubles and from the work of the devil. Illness was thought to be caused by demons. People hung charms around their neck for cure and treatments of magic and herbs were given. Warmth and rest were also used for illness. Agrimony boiled in milk was thought to relieve impotence in men. It was known that the liver casted out impurities in the blood. The stages of fetal growth were known. Ticktacktoe and backgammon were played. And puts me in the pantry. At once that girl With plaited hair who has confined me Remembers our meeting. Thick beneath Her belt swelled the thing good men Praise with their hearts and purses. The languages of invaders had produced a hybrid language that was roughly understood throughout the country. Jerusalem was thought to be at the center of the world. Every freeman who does not hold land must find a lord to answer for him. The act of homage was symbolized by holding his hands together between those of his lord. Every lord shall be personally responsible as surety for the men of his household. This included female lords. There were probably ten tithings in a hundred. The penalty is the bot for disobedience. No woman or maiden shall be forced to marry a man she dislikes or given for money. No man may have more wives than one. Grounds for divorce were mutual consent or adultery or desertion. Adultery was prohibited for men as well as for women. The penalty was payment of a bot or denial of burial in consecrated ground. Inheritance of land to adult children was by the custom of the land held. A man could kill a thief over twelve years in the act of carrying off his property over 8d. Cattle theft could be dealt with only by speedy pursuit. A person who had involuntarily lost possession of cattle is to at once raise the hue and cry. Measures and weights of goods for sale shall be correct. Moneyers accused of minting money outside a designated market were to go to the ordeal of the hot iron with the hand that was accused of doing the fraud. No clergy may gamble or participate in games of chance. The gates called Aldersgate and Cripplegate were in charge of guards. Sunday and Tuesday and Thursday. Foreigners with wine or blubber fish or other goods and their tolls. King will grant us this concession. There were courts for different geographical communities. The arrangement of the whole kingdom into shires was completed by 975 after being united under King Edgar. This officer came to be selected by the king and earl of the shire to be a judicial and financial deputy of the earl and to execute the law. The shire court was primarily concerned with issues of the larger landholders. Here the freemen interpreted the customary law of the locality. The earl declared the secular law and the bishop declared the spiritual law. They also declared the sentence of the judges. Here transfers of land were witnessed. All residents were expected to attend the leet court. The sheriff usually held each hundred court in turn. The suitors to these courts were the same as those of the shire courts. Summary procedure was followed when a criminal was caught in the act or seized after a hue and cry. Every freeman over age twelve had to be in a hundred and had to follow the hue and cry. There was a bot for anyone harboring a convicted offender. AEthelweard of Frome and Leofwine of Frome and Godric of Stoke and all the thegns of Herefordshire. Wellington and Cradley. Then Thurkil rode to St. The law was administered here on the same principles as at the hundred court. There were several vills in a hundred. Hustings Court met weekly and decided such issues as wills and bequests and commerce matters. The king and his witan decided the complaints and issues of the nobility and those cases which had not received justice in the hundred or shire court. The witan had a criminal jurisdiction and could imprison or outlaw a person. The witan could even compel the king to return any land he might have unjustly taken. The forests were peculiarly subject to the absolute will of the king. They were outside the common law. Only special officials on special commissions heard their cases. William came from Normandy to conquer England. Edward became King of England and had no children. The conquest did not take long because of the superiority of his military expertise to that of the English. Each group played a specific role in a strategy planned in advance. The English army was only composed of footmen with hand weapons such as spears and shields. They fought in a line holding up their shields to overlap each other ane form a shieldwall. The defeat of the English was thought to have been presaged by a comet. This was in keeping with the traditional oath of a new king. Conquerer declared their land confiscated. But he allowed those who were willing to acknowledge him to redeem their land by a payment of money. They agreed to hold the land as his vassals with future military services to him and receipt of his protection. The baron led his own knights under his banner. The foot soldiers were from the fyrd or were mercenaries. The Saxon governing class was destroyed. Most died or fled the country. Some men were allowed to redeem their land by money payment if they showed loyalty to the Conquerer. The earldoms became fiefs instead of magistracies. The Conquerer was a stern and fierce man and ruled as an autocrat by terror. He was not arbitrary or oppressive. The Conquerer had a strict system of policing the nation. He used secret police and spies and the terrorism this system involved. This especially curbed the minor barons and preserved the public peace. PM when everyone had to remain in their own dwellings on pain of death and all fires and candles were to be put out. Any individual of any rank could travel from end to end of the land unharmed. The barons subjugated the English who were on their newly acquired land. One piece of land may be held by several tenures. B may enfeoff a freeman C to hold of the church by giving it a certain percentage of his crops every year. There were about 200 barons who held land directly of the King. Knighthood began as a reward for valor on the field of battle by the king or a noble. Altogether there were about 5000 fighting men holding land. The lord had the duty to defend the vassals on his land. This feudal bond based on occupancy of land rather than on personal ties was uniform throughout the realm. No longer could a man choose his lord and transfer his land with him to a new lord. A tenant could not alienate his land without permission of his lord. And the people learned to look to the king for protection from abuse by their lords. A castle could be built only with permission of the King. Around the outside of the wall were ditches and banks and perhaps a moat. One traveled over these via a drawbridge let down at the gatehouse of the enclosing wall. On either side of the gatehouse were chambers for the guards. Arrows could be shot through slits in the enclosing walls. The bulk of the cattle were usually slaughtered and salted. The castle building typically was entered by an outer wood staircase to the guard room on the second floor. There was also a chapel area on the second floor. There were small areas of the third floor which could be used for sleeping. The floors were wood and were reached by a spiral stone staircase in one corner of the building. Sometimes there was a reservoir of water on an upper level with pipes carrying the water to floors below. Each floor had a fireplace with a slanted flue going through the wall to the outside. Furs and wool clothes were hung on the walls there in the summer to deter the moths. The kitchens and chapels were in the towers. The great hall was the main room of the castle. Over the main door were the family arms. There were often hawk perches overhead. The food at the head table was often tasted first by a servant as a precaution against poison. Some spits were mechanized with a cogged wheel and a weight at the end of a string. Underneath the spit was a dripping pan to hold the falling juices and fat. Mutton fat was used for candles. It could also be used for drying fruit or melting tallow. Fruits were also preserved in honey. Salt was stored in a niche in the wall near the hearth and put on the table in a salt cellar which became more elaborate over the years. Salt was very valuable and gave rise to the praise of a man as the salt of the earth. Pepper was always on the table to disguise the taste of tainted meat. People carried and used their own knives. Spoons were of silver or wood. People also ate with their fingers and washed their hands before and after meals. Feasts were stately occasions with costly tables and splendid apparel. Most people could sing and some could play the lute. Lighting of the hall at night was by oil lamps or candles on stands or on wall fixtures. Chests stored garments and jewels. Iron keys and locks were used for chests and doors. The great bed had a wooden frame and springs made of interlaced rope or strips of leather. Drapery around the bed kept out cold drafts and provided privacy. There was a water bowl for washing in the morning. A chamber pot was kept under the bed for nighttime use. There were stools on which to sit. On the roofs there were rampart walks for sentry patrols and parapets from which to shoot arrows or throw things at besiegers. Bathing was done in a wooden tub located in the garden in the summer and indoors near the fire in winter. The great bed and tub for bathing were taken on trips with the lord. Markets grew up outside castle walls. He wore tight thick cloth stockings to protect him from the mud and leather shoes. They could roll up their stockings when working in the fields. Its ends were wound around her neck. Clothes of both men and ladies were brightly colored by dyes or embroidery. Norman customs were adopted by the nation. But a few kept their whiskers and beards in protest of the Normans. Many free sokemen were caught up in the subjugation by baron landlords and were reduced almost to the condition of the unfree villein. The services they performed for their lords were often indistinguishable. The freeman still had a place in court proceedings which the unfree villein did not. The number of monks grew as the best minds were recruited into the monasteries. The Conquerer made the church subordinate to him. The bishops had to accept the status of barons. No church rules could be made without his agreement to their terms. The Archbishop of Canterbury was still recognized as a primary advisor to the king. Trinity all houses with their appurtenances which he has at Sandwich and that he has given what he has given by my license. Most of the barons had been royal servants. He built the massive White Tower in London. The only windows were slits from which arrows could be shot. On the fourth and top floor was the council chamber and the gallery of the chapel. The king and his household slept in apartments on these upper floors. Any prisoners were kept in cells at a level below the first floor. The other castles were often built at the old fortification burhs of Alfred. Swineherds could no longer drive pigs into these woods to eat acorns they beat down from oak trees. Making clearings and grazing livestock in the designated forestland were prohibited. Most of the nation was either wooded or bog at this time. London Bridge in repair. Church could shut every shop and fill the streets with armed horsemen and soldiers led by a soldier portreeve. Know that I will that you be worthy of all the laws you were worthy of in the time of King Edward. And I will not suffer any man to do you wrong. So London was not subjected to the Norman feudal system. It had neither villeins nor slaves. Castration was the punishment for rape. But these mutilations usually led to a slow death by gangrene. Saxon concepts of jurisdictional powers. Kings had appointed a royal moneyer in each to mint silver coins such as pennies for local use. London to get the new dies. It replaced the witen of wise men. Its functions were largely ceremonial. Earldoms and knighthoods were conferred and homages to the king were witnessed. Bishops were nominated. King at the Royal Court in his absence from the realm. The Chancellor headed the Chancery and the chapel. The Treasurer was responsible for the collection and distribution of revenue and was the keeper of the royal treasure at the palace at Winchester. Roman numerals the amount due and the amount paid. It was a kind of abacus. He administered by issuing writs with commands or prohibitions. These were read aloud by the sheriffs in the county courts and other locations. The language of government changed to Latin. He also headed the staff of the royal chapel. The chamberlain was a financial officer who audited and accounted. The constable was responsible for supplies for the knights of the royal household. Sheriffs became powerful figures as the primary agents for enforcing royal edicts. There was no longer supervision of them by earls nor influence on them by bishops. They were customarily prominent barons. They were responsible for remitting a certain sum annually. Sheriffs also took part in the keeping of castles and often managed the estates of the King. Most royal writs were addressed to the sheriff and county courts. They also led the county militia in time of war or rebellion. There was also much pressure to limit his term to one year. The fyrd was retained. A threat of a Viking invasion caused the Conquerer to reinstate the danegeld tax at 6s. The price of an ox was still about 30d. A detailed survey of land holdings and the productive worth of each was made in 1086. There is a mill worth 2s. This estate was deemed to be worth 480s. The whole manor five miles long and two broad. The Countess held in Coventry. The arable land employs 20 ploughs. In the demesne lands there are 3 ploughs and 7 bondmen. There are 50 villeins and 12 bordars with 20 ploughs. The woodlands are 2 miles long and the same broad. These lands of the Countess Godiva Nicholas holds to farm of the King. There are no more theows. This survey resulted in the first national tax system of about 6s. The survey also provided the Conquerer with a summary of customs of areas. That is if he be captured. They learned the knightly art of war. Enemy fighters were to be taken and held for ransom rather than killed. Those engaging in rebellion were to be pardoned and restored to some or all of their lands and titles. The aid was theoretically voluntary. Land could be held by an heir only if he could fight. The eldest son began to succeed to the whole of the lands in all military tenures. Younger sons of great houses became bishops. The relief replaced the heriot. A female heir was expected to marry a man acceptable to the lord. The estate of an heiress and her land was generally sold to the highest bidder. Astrologers resided with the families of the barons. If thou would have health and vigor Shun cares and avoid anger. Be temperate in eating And in the use of wine. After a heavy meal Rise and take the air Sleep not with an overloaded stomach And above all thou must Respond to Nature when she calls. The Conquerer allowed Jewish traders to follow him from Normandy and settle in separate sections of the main towns. They loaned money for interest for the building of castles and cathedrals. Christians were not allowed by the church to engage in this usury. The Jews could not become citizens nor could they have standing in the local courts. They could practice their own religion. Henry were hunting together in a crown forest. Henry then became king. All freemen shall have a surety who would hand him over to justice for his offenses or pay the damages or fines due. No cattle shall be sold except in towns and before three witnesses. No man shall be sold over the sea. This ended the slave trade at the port of Bristol. The death penalty for persons tried by court is abolished. Only freemen and not bound villeins had standing in this court. They continued to transact their business in the English language. King Edward the Confessor. The recording of this law was begun. A person could spend months trying to catch up with the Royal Court to present a case. Sometimes the Conquerer sent the justiciar or commissioners to hold his Royal Court in the various districts. The commissioner appointed groups of local men to give a collective verdict upon oath for each trial he conducted. Curia Regis heard appeals from lower court decisions. Presumably the man in the wrong would not fight as well because he was burdened with a guilty conscience. London had its own traditions. Its criminal court had the power of outlawry as did the county courts. Monday in the Guildhall. The election was by a small governing body and the most wealthy and reputable men and not a popular election. The aldermen had special knowledge of the law and a duty to declare it at the Hustings Court. Each alderman also conducted wardmoots in his ward and decided criminal and civil issues between its residents. Within the wards were the guilds of the city. The reaction to this was that the murderer mutilated the corpse to make identification of ethnicity impossible. So the Conquerer ordered that every murder victim was assumed to be Norman unless proven English. This began a court custom in murder cases of first proving the victim to be English. Michael and his monks forever. The most victorious King William approved and confirmed this decision. Normans and native English by his marriage to a niece of King Edward the Confessor called Matilda. She married him on condition that he grant a charter of rights undoing some practices of the past reigns of William I and William II. Peace was also furthered by the fact that Henry I had been born in England and English was his native tongue. The private wars of lords were now replaced by less serious mock battles. He was faithful and generous to his friends. He showed a strong practical element of calculation and foresight. He had an efficient intelligence gathering network and an uncanny knack of detecting hidden plans before they became conspiratorial action. He loved books and built a palace at Oxford to which he invited scholars for lively discussion. Matilda was learned and a literary patron. She founded an important literary and scholastic center. Her compassion was great and her charities extensive. These were next to small monastic communities. She also had new roads and bridges built. His coronation charter describes certain property rights he restored after the oppressive reign of his brother. Know that by the mercy of God and by the common counsel of the barons of the whole kingdom of England I have been crowned king of this realm. I take anything from the demesne of the Church or from its vassals during the period which elapses before a successor is installed. I abolish all the evil customs by which the kingdom of England has been unjustly oppressed. Some of those evil customs are here set forth. I will dispose of her in marriage and of her lands according to the counsel given me by my barons. I will not give her in marriage unless she herself consents. I will not give her in marriage except with her consent. And I order that my barons shall act likewise towards the sons and daughters and widows of their men. I will allow that it shall be bestowed according to his desires. By the common counsel of my barons I have retained the forests in my own hands as my father did before me. I order that this peace shall henceforth be kept. At London when I was crowned. Royal justice became a force to be reckoned with by the multiplication of justices. Henry had a great respect for legality and the forms of judicial action. A woman could inherit a fief if she married. The primary way for a man to acquire control of land was to marry an heiress. A man could also be awarded land which had escheated to the King. Many widows bought their freedom from guardianship or remarriage from the King. Women whose husbands were at war also ran the land of their husbands. The roof was of thatch or narrow overlapping wood shingles. There were barns for grain and animals. The area was circumscribed by a moat over which there was a drawbridge to a gatehouse. Open hospitality accompanied this communal living. There was little privacy. At night some slept on the floor of the hall. There were these types of land and wasteland on each manor. The arable land was allotted to the villeins in strips to equalize the best and worst land and their distance from the village where the villeins lived. The villeins held land of their lord for various services such as agricultural labor or raising domestic animals. Work lasted from sunrise to sunset and included women and children. The old often suffered from rheumatism. Many people had bronchitis. Customary ways were maintained. The Woodward preserved the timber. The Messer supervised the harvesting. The Hayward removed any fences from the fields after harvest to allow grazing by cattle and sheep. The Ponder impounded stray stock. The smoke rose through a hole in the roof. Butter had first been used for cooking and as a medicine to cure constipation and for puny children it could be salted down for the winter. They ate from wood bowls using a wood spoon. Liquids were heated in a kettle. They slept on straw mattresses or sacks on the floor or on benches. Fires were put out at night to guard against fire burning down the huts. The warmth of the animals then helped make the hut warm. All clothes were homemade. Sometimes he also wore breeches reaching below the knee. Sometimes a short cape over the shoulders was attached. Linen was too expensive for commoners. Occasionally there would be an outbreak of a nervous disorder due to the ergot fungus growing in the rye used for bread. Woodpenny was a yearly payment for gathering dead wood. The usual aids were also expected to be paid. Markets were about twenty miles apart because a farmer from the outlying area could then carry his produce to the nearest town and walk back again in the daylight hours of one day. The weaver lived in a cottage with few and narrow windows with little furniture. First the raw wool was washed with water at the front door to remove the grease. The cloth dried through the night on a rack outside the cottage. The weavers stood at the market holding up their cloth. The cloth merchant who bought the cloth then had it dyed or dressed according to his requirements. Its surface could be raised with teazleheads and cropped or sheared to make a nap. Some cloth was sold to tailors to make into clothes. The hide was bought by the tanner to make into leather. The leather was sold to shoemakers and glovemakers. Millers bought harvested grain to make into flour. Flour was sold to bakers to make into breads. Smiths and locksmiths worked over their hot fires. Games with dice were sometimes played. They propelled themselves by striking the ice with staves shod with iron. The maidens danced with timbrels. The cloak generally had a hood and was fastened at the neck with a brooch. A girdle or belt was worn at the waist. Men wore stockings to the knee and shoes. The fashion of long hair on men returned. There were watermills for crafts and for supplying and draining water in all parts of the nation. Coal mining underground began as a family enterprise. Stone bridges over rivers could accommodate one person traveling by foot or by horseback and were steep and narrow. The wheelbarrow came into use to cart materials for building castles and cathedrals. They had plots narrow in frontage along the road and deep. Town buildings were typically part stone and part timber as a compromise between fire precautions and expense. They were literate enough to do accounts. So they did their own valuation of the sum due to the crown so as not to pay the sheriff any more than that. This they did by obtaining a charter renting the town to the burghers at a fee farm rent equal to the sum thus deducted from the amount due from the county. To be free of something meant to have exclusive rights and privileges with respect to it. Selling wholesale could take place only in a borough. Burgesses were free to marry. They were not subject to defense except of the borough. They were exempt from attendance at county and hundred courts. They paid an annual tribute and were given a monopoly of weaving cloth within a radius of several miles. Henry standardized the yard as the length of his own arm. Some young men were apprenticed to craftsmen to assist them and learn their craft. Most of them were named after people. London was ruled by sixteen families linked by business and marriage ties. There were bakehouses at which one could leave raw joints of meat to be cooked and picked up later. Failure to do so was a felony and the ward would eject him to avoid the charge of harboring him with its heavy fine. The arrival of ships with cargoes from continental ports and their departure with English exports was the regular waterside life below London Bridge. Many foreign merchants lived in London. There was a fraternal organization of citizens who had possessed their own lands with sac and soke and other customs in the days of King Edward. A lady would take an occasional bath in a half cask in her home. All London craft work was suspended for one month at harvest time. And there shall be no other justiciar over the men of London. And they shall be exempt from the payment of scot and danegeld and the murder fine. And none of them shall take part in trial by combat. And I assure to my citizens their lands and the property mortgaged to them and the debts due to them both within the City and without. London gave as toll and hence sustained as loss. And all those who owe debts to citizens shall pay them or shall clear themselves in London from the charge of being in debt to them. Witnessed at Westminster. The right of redress for tolls exacted was new because the state of the law was that the property of the inhabitants was liable to the king or superior lord for the common debt. These are the laws and customs which the burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne had in the time of Henry King of England and ought to have. A burgess cannot distrain upon a burgess without the leave of the reeve. A burgess may give and sell his land and go whither he will freely and quietly unless there be a claim against him. It was scarce and expensive. Ships could carry about 300 people. Navigation was by simple charts that included wind direction for different seasons and the direction of north. The direction of the ship could be generally determined when the sky was clear by the position of the sun during the day or the north star during the night. Arthur became king at age 15. He had an inborn goodness and generosity as well as courage. He and his knights won battles against foreign settlers and neighboring clans. Arthur married Guenevere and established a court and retinue. Modred who had crowned himself King. Modred were killed and Arthur was severely wounded. Arthur told his kinsman Constantine to rule Britain as king in his place. There were about 90 physicians. The Exchequer became a separate body. The great barons made their payments directly to the Exchequer. The income from royal estates was received by the Exchequer and then commingled with the other funds. One chancellor paid Henry about 3000 pounds for the office. Forests were still retained by Kings for their hunting of boars and stags. The boundaries of the Royal Forests were enlarged. Certain inhabitants thereof supplied the royal foresters with meat and drink and received certain easements and rights of common therein. The forest law reached the extreme of severity and cruelty under Henry I. Offenders were rarely allowed to substitute a money payment. When fines were imposed they were heavy. A substantial number of barons and monasteries were heavily in debt to the Jews. The king taxed the Jews at will. If any money is over he shall return it to the debtor. Past due rent in a borough was punishable by payment of 10s. English law of the time. This showed an awareness of the ideal of written law as a statement of judicial principles as well as of the practice of kingship. Roman law used by the Normans found their way into English law. Church law provided that only consent between a man and woman was necessary for marriage. Consent could not be coerced. Penalties in marriage agreements for not going through with the marriage were deemed invalid. A couple living together could be deemed married. This was the only ground for annulment of a marriage. Fathers were usually ordered to provide some sustenance and support for their illegitimate children. The court punished infanticide and abortion. Church sanctuary was to be given to fugitives of violent feuds until they could be given a fair trial. His appointed justices administered justice in these courts on regular circuits. The sheriff now only produced the proper people and preserved order at the county courts and presided over the nonroyal pleas and hundred courts. Henry personally presided over hearings of important legal cases. He punished crime severely. A prosecutor was now at trials as well as a justice. Trial is still by compurgation. Trial by combat was relatively common. Thus the Crown increased the range of offenses subject to its jurisdiction and arrogated to itself profits from the penalties imposed. A murderer could be given royal pardon from the death penalty so that he could pay compensation to the relatives. The Crown used its superior coercive power to enforce the legal decisions of other courts. These writs allowed people to come to the Royal Court on certain issues. Records of the verdicts of the Royal Court were sent with these itinerant justices for use as precedent in these courts. Thus royal authority was brought into the localities and served to check baronial power over the common people. These itinerant justices also transacted the local business of the Exchequer in each county. It also decided cases in which the powers of the popular courts had been exhausted or had failed to do justice. The Royal Court also decided land disputes between barons who were too strong to submit to the county courts. The county and hundred courts assessed the personal property of individuals and their taxes due to the King. The county court decided land disputes between people who had different barons as their respective lords. Sometimes a person was stoned to death. The county courts met twice yearly. He could be slain by anyone at will. Sometimes the chief pledges were present to represent all the men in their respective frankpledges. This court also made the decision of whether a certain person was a villein or freeman. The manor court took over issues which had once been heard in the vill or hundred court. The borough court was presided over by a reeve who was a burgess as well as a royal official. It provided guardianship of infants during probate of their personal property. English church or nation. The ultimate punishment was excommunication with social ostracism. A person could also be denied a Christian burial in consecrated ground. Excommunication was usually imposed for failure to obey an order or showing contempt of the law or of the courts. It required a hearing and a written reason. It was tacitly understood that the punishment for heresy was death by burning. There were no heresy cases up to 1400 and few after that. The state usually assured itself the sentence was just before imposing it. The court of the rural dean was the ecclesiastical parallel of the hundred court of secular jurisdiction and usually had the same land boundaries. There was a separate judicial system for the laws of the forest. Henry was the first Norman king to be fully literate and he learned Latin. He had many books and maintained a school. She herself headed armies. He was indifferent to rank and impatient of pomp to the point of being careless about his appearance. He usually dressed in riding clothes and was often unkempt. He was an outstanding legislator and administrator. Almost all legal and fiscal institutions appear in their first effective form during his reign. Robbers were hanged and any man who raped a woman was castrated. Foreign merchants with precious goods could journey safely through the land from fair to fair. Foreign merchants bought wool cloth and hides. A list of such strangers was to be given to itinerant justices. Henry had character and the foresight to build up a centralized system of government that would survive him. He developed the methods and structure of government so that there was a great increase in the scope of administrative activity without a concurrent increase of personal power of the officials who discharged it. The royal household translated the royal will into action. There was a Chief Justiciar for legal matters and a Treasurer. Royal government was largely built upon what had once been purely domestic offices. Kings had called upon their chaplains to pen letters for them. There were four other departments of the household. The steward presided over the hall and kitchens and was responsible for supplying the household and guests with food supplies. The butler had duties in the hall and cellars and was responsible for the supply of wine and ale. The higher ones were served with a writ addressed to them personally. Knights and below were summoned by a general writ to the sheriff. Royal Court the common court of the land. Each court writ had to satisfy specific conditions for this court to have jurisdiction over an action or event. It limited the jurisdiction of all other courts and subordinated them to the Royal Court. The Tower of London was in the custody of one of the two justiciars. Towers were spaced along the north wall and the Thames River flowed below the south wall. The court was a center of culture as well as of government. The game of backgammon was played. London extended about a mile along the Thames and about half a mile inland. Most of the houses were wooden structures. Walls between houses had to be stone to a height of 16 feet and thatched roofs were banned because there had been many fires. All were built of stone. The synod of Westminster of 1175 prescribed that all marriages were to be performed by the church. Church law required a warning prior to suspension or excommunication. Fish but no meat was eaten on Fridays. There was dark rye bread and expensive white wheat bread. Water was obtained from streams running through the town to the Thames and from springs. Most people washed their bodies. Even the poor had beds and bed clothes. Few babies survived childhood. The sellers of merchandise and hirers of labor were distributed every morning into their several localities according to their trade. Some vendors walked the streets announcing their wares for sale. Vendors on the Thames River bank sold cooked fish caught from the river and wine from ships and wine cellars. Cook shops sold roasted meats covered with hotly spiced sauces. London Bridge was built of stone for the first time. It had such a width that a row of wood houses and a chapel was built on top of it. In the spring it was impassable by ships because the flow of water under it varied in height on either side of the bridge by several feet at half tide. Horses wore horseshoes made of iron or of a crude steel. On the north side of the city was a great forest with fields and wells where students and other young men from the city took walks in the fresh evening air. Mill wheels turned at various streams. Near London in the country was a glass factory. London were closed for the night. Anyone found on the streets after this curfew could be arrested. Offenders were often beheaded and their heads placed on spikes on London Bridge. Some of the cloth was exported. The bailiffs were chosen from year to year and swore before the mayor of London to do and keep their office well and truly. Paying an annual payment freed the weavers from liability to inconsequent royal fines. The weavers were allowed to buy and to sell in London freely and quietly. They had all the rights of other freemen of the city. In this they stand as the prototype of English medieval guilds. These rights represented the standard which all bodies of craftsmen desired to attain. The right of independent jurisdiction was exceptional. London did not retain its right to appoint its own sheriff and justice given by Henry I. Then the mayor was elected yearly by the aldermen of the city wards and approved by the king. He was typically a rich prince chosen by the barons and chief merchants of London. London and Westminster growth led to their replacing Winchester as the capital. Barthomew infirmary was established in London for the care of sick pilgrims traveling to the shrine of Becket in Canterbury. It had been inspired by a monk who saw a vision of St. Barthomew telling him to build a church and an infirmary. London became a major trading center for foreign goods from many lands. Paris and had attracted disciples for a long time. These schools grew up around St. Oxford had started as a burh and had a royal residence and many tradesmen. It was given its basic charter in 1155 by the King. It became a model charter for other towns. Teaching would then provide an income sufficient to support a wife. The master of arts was analogous to the master craftsman of a guild. Later came the study of medicine. The use of paper supplemented the use of parchment for writing. Man was made for the sake and service of God. All fiefs to be inherited by the eldest son had to be intact. Every lord could exact fealty from his servants. English national race and character was formed. Only a few barons still had lands in Normandy. Stories of good King Arthur were popular and set ideals for behavior and justice in an otherwise barbaric age where force was supreme. Romantic stories were written and read in English. Wealthy men often gave their daughters dowries in case they were widowed. This might be matched by a marriage settlement by a prospective husband. Some boroughs were given the authority to confer freedom on the villein by enrolling him in their guild or allowing him to stay in the borough for a year and a day. The guilds met frequently in their drinking halls and drew up regulations for the management of their trade. Each borough was represented by twelve reputable burgesses. Each vill was represented by a reeve and four reputable men. It was very useful in flat areas where streams were too slow for a watermill unless a dam were built. But a dam often flooded agricultural land. The weavers of Oxford paid 27s. The shoemakers paid 67s. And no man has there any right except they and their ministers. I forbid any from vexing them on this account. And they shall have my firm peace. No burgess may sue or be sued out of Bristol. The hundred court shall be held only once a week. No one in any plea may argue his cause in miskenning. A lord had the right of preventing his tenants and their families from marrying without his consent. They may grind their grain wherever they may choose. Hanse and from all other customs throughout all my land. And I prohibit all persons from vexing or disturbing them therein upon forfeiture to me. That the aforesaid burgesses and their heirs may well and honorably quietly and in free burgage hold of me and my heirs as ever in the time of my father and others of my ancestors they have held better more firmly and freer. In the second place I grant to them all the free and good laws which the burgesses of Lincoln have better and freer. If any one happen to fall into my amercement he may be reasonably fined by my bailiff and the faithful burgesses of the court. But if any foreign merchant shall have done anything improper in the town that same may be regulated in the portimoot before the aforesaid justice without a suit at law. But they may freely have their own portmanmoot in which all pleas appertaining to the earl and to them may be justly treated of. I grant also that the cordwainers who afterwards may come into the town of Oxford shall be of the same guild and shall have the same liberties and customs which the corvesars have and ought to have. A guild merchant for wool dominated and regulated the wool trade in many boroughs. The waterwheel was a technological advance replacing human labor whereby the cloth was fulled. The waterwheel turned a shaft which lifted hammers to pound the wet cloth in a trough. Wool packers and washers could work only for guild members. Strangers who brought wool to the town for sale could sell only to guild members. A guildsman could not sell wool retail to strangers nor go into partnership with a man outside the guild. The advantages of guild membership extended beyond profit in the wool trade. Members were free from the tolls that strangers paid. They alone were free to sell certain goods retail. Leicester or in a distant market. It also forbade middlemen from profiting at the expense of the public. The moneys due to the king from the guilds of a town were collected by the town reeve. Armed conflict did not interfere much with daily life because the national wealth was still composed mostly of flocks and herds and simple buildings. Life would be back to normal within a week. Henry wanted to check this power of the barons. The master of a household was responsible for every villein in his household. Others had to form groups of ten and swear obedience to the chief of the group. The sheriff was responsible for maintaining lists of men liable for military service and procuring supplies. This national militia could be used to maintain the peace. The sheriff could call upon the military array of the county as a posse comitatus to take a band of thieves into custody or to quell disorder. Henry decided to use a mercenary army and a mercenary fleet. The other nobility now tended towards tournaments with mock foot battles between two sides. New taxes replaced the Danegeld tax. The smaller measure curtailed estates and increased taxation. The towns and demesne lands of the crown paid a tax based on their produce that was collected by the itinerant justices. Clergy were also taxed. This new system of taxation increased the royal income about threefold. There was a standard for reliefs paid of 100s. Every hide of land paid the sheriff 2s. This was probably the old Danegeld. This enabled Henry to hire soldiers who would be more directly under his own control and to organize a more efficient army. Henry II restored the silver coinage to its standard of purity. The first great inflation in England occurred between 1180 and 1220. Most goods and services increased threefold over these forty years. Aylward the cellarer render account of 7 pounds 12s. They paid and are quit. William of Witherington held for nothing. James Oisel held without service. Sum of the whole tax 36 pounds 14s. To the same for tallage 39 pounds by one tally. For one millstone purchased for the mill 24s. For threshing 192 quarters of grain 32s. John de Dispensa by three tallies. The same render account of 178 and a half quarters from all the produce of barley. The same render account of 311 quarters and 2 bushels from all the produce of oats. For prebends of two carters 7 quarters and 2 bushels. And there remains 14 quarters and 1 strike. The same render account of 6 and a half quarters from the whole produce of beans. For planting in the garden half a quarter. The same render account of 4 quarters and 1 strike from all the produce of peas. For the balance sold 2 and a half quarters and 1 strike. The same render account of 104 oxen remaining from the previous year. And of 2 yoked from useless animals. And of 1 from the will of Robert Copp. And there remain 91 oxen. The same render account of 2 goats remaining from the previous year. The same render account of 19 cows remaining from the previous year. And there remain 24 cows. The same render account of 7 heifers and 2 steers remaining from the previous year. The same render account of 12 yearlings remaining from the previous year. The same render account of 858 sheep remaining from the previous year. And of 8 bought before birth. And there remain 972 sheep. Walter before shearing. And there remain 692 sheep. And there remain 569 lambs. In the balance sold 1497 skins with 16 skins from Lindsey which made 11 pondera. The same render account of 569 lamb skins. The same render account of 138 cheeses from arrears of the previous year. And of 19 small cheeses. And of 5 larger ones from the arrears of the previous year. And of 273 cheeses which were begun the 6th of April and finished on the feast of St. April to the vigil of the feast of St. In expenses of the lord king and lord bishop on the feasts of St. And there remain 52 small cheeses which make one head. The same render account of 124 hogs remaining from the previous year. And of 29 that were born of sows. And there remain 58 pigs. Also 19 suckling pigs. The same render account of 48 chickens from arrears of the previous year. And of 258 chickens for cheriset. In expenses of the lord bishop on the feast of St. In expenses of the same on the feast of St. The same freed for the expenses of the lord bishop meat of 2 cows taken to Cranbourne. And of 5 oxen and 1 quarter of old beef from arrears of the previous year. And of 84 hogs from Downton. And of 71 hogs from Mardon. And of 10 hogs from Overton. And of 14 hogs from Harwell. And of 7 hogs from Knoyle. In expenses of the lord bishop at the feast of St. In expenses of the same at the feast of St. In expenses of the lord bishop delivered to the same cook at Knoyle on the Saturday before the feast of St. And there remain 74 sides of bacon. In expenses of the lord king and lord bishop at the feast of St. He spent most of his term on crusade to recover Jerusalem. The church decreed that those who went on these crusades would be remitted of his sins. John ruled without her influence. He had no conscience and his oaths were no good. He trusted and was trusted by no one. He had a huge appetite for money. London for confirmation of its charter. He imposed levies on the capital value of all personal and moveable goods. Writs were withheld or sold at exorbitant prices. Crushing penalties were imposed to increase the profits of justice. He asserted over fowls of the air the same exclusive right as over beasts of the forest. Richard was on the Crusades to recover Jerusalem for Christendom. Normandy arguing that military service was only due within the kingdom of England. John had private and public enemies. No one trusted him and he trusted no one. They joined the barons to pressure him to sign the Magna Carta correcting his abuses. John to sign the Magna Carta correcting his abuses. A tenant may marry off a daughter unless his lord shows some just cause for refusing to consent to the marriage. The land of a knight or other tenant of a military fee is inherited by his eldest son. The socage land of a free sokeman goes by its ancient custom before the Norman Conquest. Dower law prevented a woman from selling her dower during the life of her husband. But he could sell it or give it away. He had to maintain the heir in a manner suitable to his dignity and restore to him when he came of age his inheritance in good condition discharged from debts. Male heirs of sokemen who were under the age of fifteen were in the custody of their nearest kindred. Female heirs remained in the custody of their lords until they married. The lord was bound to find a marriage for his ward when she became fourteen years of age and then deliver her inheritance to her. She could receive homage from men. A man who married a woman who had inherited land could not sell this land without the consent of its heirs. The other third he may dispose of by will. A will required two witnesses. A will could not be made by a man on his death bed because he may well have lost his memory and reason. But he could give a marriage gift to a daughter regardless of the lawful heir. A freeman who married a villein lost his freedom. All shipwrecked persons shall be treated with kindness and none of their goods or merchandise shall be taken from them. Passage on the Thames River may not be obstructed by damming up the river on each side leaving a narrow outlet to net fish. All such weirs shall be removed. Henry II wanted all freemen to be equally protected by one system of law and government. Royal Court the common law of the nation. Difficult cases were decided by the king and wise men of his council. Side by side with the reeve and four men of the rural townships appeared the twelve legal men of each of the chartered boroughs which owed no suit to the ordinary county court. Women did not serve on juries. The doctrine of tenure applied universally to the land law formed the basis for judicial procedure in determining land rights. All hold the land of some lord and ultimately of the King. No pleadings were necessary and the action could proceed and judgment given even without the presence of the defendant. The justices amerced the losing party with a monetary penalty. A successful plaintiff might be awarded damages to compensate for the loss of revenue. Then it could give possession to the heir. Eventually royal justices acquired authority to decide the ultimate question of right to land using the grand assize as an alternative to the traditional procedures which ended in trial by combat. The king to the sheriff greeting. And have the summoners and this writ. I claim against this N. Then the defendant chose to deny the claim word for word with proof by combat or to put himself upon the grand assize of the king. And summon by good summoners N. The claimant could object to any of the twelve knights for just cause as determined by the court. Burgage tenure was not usually decided by assize. The four knights came to be selected by the suitors of the county court rather than by the sheriff. This assize procedure extended in time to all other types of civil actions. These assizes were an ancient institution in many parts of the country. The procedure was made more regular instead of depending on crime waves. The ordeal was abolished by the Lateran Council of 1215. Clarendon of 1166 was loss of a foot and abjuring the realm. The assize of Northhampton of 1176 added loss of the right hand. Trespass was a serious and forcible breach of the peace onto land that developed from the criminal law of felony. One found guilty of it could be fined and imprisoned as well as amerced. The Royal Court had grown substantially and was not always presided over by the King. Chancery for a standardized writ into which the cause had to fit. The plaintiff had to pay a fee and provide a surety that the plea was brought in good faith. The oldest roll of 1194 is almost completely comprised of land cases. A wife could represent her husband. The principal was then bound by the actions of his agent. Gradually men appeared who made a business of representing whoever would employ them. Many churches had been built by a lord on his manor for his villeins. The lord had then appointed a parson and provided for his upkeep out of the income of the church. This procedure used twelve recognitors selected by the sheriff. The lord could not use the chattels taken while they were in his custody. This court also determined inheritance and dower issues. The court of the vill enforced the village ordinances. The hundred court met twice a month and dealt with the petty crimes of lowly men in the neighborhood of a few vills. The knights make the county courts work as legal and administrative agencies of the Crown. The peace of the sheriff still exists for his county. Law required every good and lawful man to be bound to follow the hue and cry when it was raised against an offender who was fleeing. Constitutions of Clarendon. Selection of archbishops was also a frequent matter of contention between king and pope. The church copied the assize procedure developed by the Royal Court to detect ecclesiastical offenses. Trial was still by compurgation. Chancery complied as a matter of course. This went on for six centuries. The delineations of jurisdiction among these courts were confused and there was much competing and overlapping of jurisdictions. The office of coroner was established about 1194 to supplement the judicial investigations of crimes with local officers prior to the arrival of the itinerant justices. Four knights who were residents of the county and possessed sufficient land were elected by the county court for life. Sometimes they had county and royal connections instead. They determined if sudden deaths were accidental or due to murder and the cause of death of prisoners. The coroner sat with the sheriff at every county court and went with him on his turns. This office and the forbidding of sheriffs to act as justices in their own counties reduced the power of the sheriffs. These were to select on oath two knights from each hundred. Chief Justiciar Ranulph Glanvill wrote a treatise on the writs which could be brought in the Royal Court and the way they could be used. It was a practical manual of procedure and of the law administered in the Royal Court. This splits into two actions. The detinue award is for the specific chattel or its value. The use of trespass grew as private actions for felony were supplanted by public indictment. It occasioned outlawry in default of appearance. These personal actions were initiated in common law courts by their respective writs. Ralf of Woodbridge seeks before the justices his free tenement in Hebston by the assize of novel disseisin against Hugh Bardolf. Against which assize Hugh said that he had that seisin by judgment of his court for the default of the same Ralf. And the court has recorded the summons and distraints reasonably made on the same Ralf. And let Ralf plead by writ of right if he want and be in mercy for his false claim. The assize came to recognize if Clement son of Walter unjustly and without judgment disseised Matilda of Turroc of her free tenement within the assize. Clement comes and says that he disseised her by judgment of his court. And therefore by judgment of his court he seised it. Matilda denies all word for word. Matilda have her seisin and let Clement be in mercy for disseisin. The assize came to recognize if the prior of Lecton unjustly and without judgment disseised Reginald son of Hereward and Essolda his wife of his free tenement in Clapston after the first coronation of the lord king. And let him treat them justly by judgment of his court. The assize comes to recognize if Simon of Brewes and Luke cleric and Peter of Brewes unjustly and without a judgment disseised Odo of Stanfeld and Juliana his wife of her free tenement in Michehey within the assize. And it was testified that Odo holds that land from the same Simon. Simon was ordered to replevy that land to Odo as well as the chattels and to treat him rightfully in his court. Geoffrey son of Leveric unjustly and without judgment disseised Richard son of William of Sudbury of his free tenement in Sudbury after the feast of St Michael next before the coronation of the lord king. Sudbury and convoked her court and made the same Richard to be summoned to come to show by what warrant he held her land. And thus by consideration of her court she seised her land and holds it. Which court she produced and which attests this. Richard comes and denies that he was ever summoned or came into her court by summons or vouched to warranty or so lost seisin by consideration of the court of the countess. Day is given them at the quindene of St. And he comes with his law and makes it with the abovesaid suit. Richard has complained. The names of the men of the countess are in the writ. And Nicholas defends all of it. And that this is so the jurors testify. William and Robert in mercy for the false claim. Let the king have his chattels from William. And Osbert and Jordan come and defend word by word. Serlo betook himself against Osbert in the first instance. And let Jordan be in custody until it be known how Osbert shall fare. It is considered that he purge himself by water under the Assize. Let them purge themselves by water under the Assize. It is testified that he thus raped her and that she was seen bleeding. By leave of the justices they made concord on the terms of his espousing her. Walter pursues those boots as his. Lefchild of the said receipt. So let him purge himself by water under the Assize. And Robert comes and defends all of it word by word. It is considered that he purge himself by ordeal of iron. Let the others be in custody until it be known how Robert shall fare. Let the other appellees go quit. Reginald le Teinus accused of the receipt and fellowship of Robert the outlaw comes and defends. So let him purge himself by water under the Assize. Robert escaped from his custody. And Odo defends it all. Wulward of Wadebridge was burgled. Maud by ordeal of iron. And Philip comes and defends all of it word by word. Roger of Tregadec of the same robbery and of the same wounds. Peter be in mercy for a false appeal. It is considered that Robert do give her three pence in respect of the wine and do go quit. Osbert Church defends all of it. The knights of the hundred of Penwith say that they suspect him of the said death. Reginald and Arkald be in mercy. Osbert is purged by the water. So is considered that he purge himself by water. The appellees have not come nor essoined themselves. Therefore the jurors are in mercy for presenting what they ought not to have presented. William be in mercy for his false claim. Simon comes and defends all of it word by word. Astin shall carry the iron. He has chosen that Astin shall carry it. Astin has waged the law. William of Land and his frankpledge and Ralph of Stures. And the appellee defends all of it word by word etc. Likewise the jurors say that in their belief he appeals him out of spite rather than for just cause. And the serjeant of the riding and the coroners and the twelve knights testify that they never saw wound nor blood. William Burel is in mercy. Let him be in custody. And William Manby is in mercy for false testimony. Afterwards came the Prior of Sixhills and undertook to have William to right before the justices. Therefore it is considered that the appeal is null and that Denis be in mercy. William his son and Roger his son of the death of William her brother. And Alice does not prosecute. Therefore let her be in mercy and let her be arrested. Walter of Croxby and William Miller of the death of her father and of a wound given to herself. Wapentake of Aswardhurn. Juliana of Creeton appeals Adam of Merle of battery and robbery. Adam himself is excused from the plea by the essoin that he has cast. Alan of breaking a bone. Hugh of Hyckham of the same death and Baldwin of Elsham and Ralph Hoth and Colegrim as accessories. And the coroners by their rolls testify this also. And Walter defends all of it by his body. And it is testified by the coroners and by the whole county that Hereward showed his wounds at the proper time and has made sufficient suit. Therefore it is considered that there be battle. William his father and the Prior of Pinchbeck. Let them come armed in the quindene of St. And William Cook does the same. Guy did not show the matter to the wapentake until a fortnight before St. And the county together with the coroners says that they never heard the suit in their court. And let William and those who are appealed as accessories go quit. Thomas Squire and William Oildene of robbery. And he does not prosecute. To judgment against the coroners and the twelve jurors. Ralph has assented to this. William Picot and those who were his fellows ought to account. Robert White slew Walter of Hugeford and fled. Elyas of Lilleshall fled to church for the death of a woman slain at Lilleshall. He confessed the death and abjured the realm. Peter of Hopton were taken for the death of the said woman slain at Lilleshall. And Walter comes and defends all of it word by word as the court etc. Roger offers to prove this by his body as the court shall consider. Robert and Roger in mercy. Therefore let him purge himself by ordeal of water. And he defends all of it. And the jurors and the whole neighborhood suspect him of that death. And so it is considered that he purge himself by ordeal of iron for he has elected to bear the iron. And the bailiffs deny that they take anything from the knights in Staffordshire. Staffordshire as in Warwickshire. Lichfield did not pay toll in Staffordshire. Therefore the bailiffs are in mercy. They were usually quadrangular around a central courtyard. Having a second floor necessitated a fireplace in the wall so the smoke could go up two floors to the roof. Other rooms each had a fireplace. Often the hall was on the second floor and took up two stories. There was a fireplace on one wall of the bottom story. There were small windows around the top story and on the inside of the courtyard. The walls were plastered. The floor was wood with some carpets. Roofs were timbered with horizontal beams. Sometimes there was a separate room for a dairy. Bees were kept for their honey. A hood was attached to it. The tunic of merchants and middle class men reached to the calf. Monks and nuns wore long black robes with hoods. Every great household was bound to give alms. It became customary to divide the property of a deceased man without a son equally among his daughters. Lords were receiving homage from all the daughters and thereby acquiring marriage rights over all of them. Statutes after a period of civil war proscribing the retaking of land discouraged the enclosure of waste land. This made it possible for a farm laborer to till one continuous piece of land instead of scattered strips. Looms were now mounted with two bars. The village tanner and bootmaker supplied long pieces of soft leather for more protection than sandals. Tanning mills replaced some hand labor. Every village had a smith and possibly a carpenter for construction of ploughs and carts. The smith obtained coal from coal fields for heating the metal he worked. The position of the sails of the wind mills was changed by manual labor when the direction of the wind changed. Most men wore a knife because of the prevalence of murder and robbery. It had been long customary for the groom to endow his bride in public at the church door. This was to keep her and her children if he died first. There were 28 sheriffs for 38 counties. The sheriff was usually a substantial landholder and a knight who had been prominent in the local court. He usually had a castle in which he kept persons he arrested. There were about five coroners per county and they served for a number of years. They were chosen by the county court. He was usually chosen from the local gentry. The constable and bailiff operated at the hundred and parish level to detect crime and keep the peace. They served on the grand assize. They investigated and reported on local abuses and grievances. Reading and writing in the English language was taught. The use of English ceased to be a mark of vulgarity. In 1258 the first governmental document was issued in English as well as in Latin and French. Latin started falling into disuse. Girls of high social position were also taught riding and hawking. Discipline was maintained by the birch or rod. Latin with some skill in speaking Latin was a necessary background. The students came from all backgrounds. Rome rather than for the economic purposes of those who had to work. Latin learning had already been absorbed without detriment to the church. He also had to write a thesis on some chosen subject and defend it against the faculty. There were mob fights between students from the north and students from the south and between students and townsmen. Chancellor of the university at Oxford. Students paid for meals there. Corners of the room were often partitioned off for private study. Six hours of sleep were considered sufficient. In 1221 the friars established their chief school at Oxford. They walked barefoot from place to lace preaching. They begged for their food and lodgings. A warden and about 30 scholars lived and ate meals together in the college buildings. The sun and moon and planets were each on a sphere around the earth that was responsible for their movements. Astrology explained how the position of the stars and planets influenced man and other earthly things. A star often was thought to presage the birth of a great man or a hero. But there were medical interventions such as pressure and binding were applied to bleeding. Arrow and sword wounds to the skin or to any protruding intestine were washed with warm water and sewn up with needle and silk thread. Ribs were spread apart by a wedge to remove arrow heads. Fractured bones were splinted or encased in plaster. Dislocations were remedied. Bladder stones blocking urination were pushed back into the bladder or removed through an artificial opening in the bladder. He read Arab writers and studied the radiation of light and heat. He comprehended the magnifying power of convex lenses and conceptualized the combination of lenses which would increase the power of vision by magnification. He realized that rays of light pass so much faster than those of sound or smell that the time is imperceptible to humans. He knew that rays of heat and sound penetrate all matter without our awareness and that opaque bodies offered resistance to passage of light rays. He knew the power of parabolic concave mirrors to cause parallel rays to converge after reflection to a focus and knew that a mirror could be produced that would induce combustion at a fixed distance. He calculated the circumference of the world and the latitude and longitude of terrestrial positions. He foresaw sailing around the world. He urged that there be experiments in chemistry to develop medicinal drugs. He studied the planetary motions and astronomical tables to forecast future events. He did calculations on days in a month and days in a year which later contributed to the legal definition of a leap year. His contribution to the development of science was abstracting the method of experiment from the concrete problem to see its bearing and importance as a universal method of research. His explanation of a rainbow as a result of natural laws was contrary to theological opinion that a rainbow was placed in the heavens to assure mankind that there was not to be another universal deluge. The making and selling of goods diverged e. Crafts fought each other. There was a street battle with much bloodshed between the goldsmiths and the parmenters and between the tailors and the cordwainers in 1267 in London. There was also a major fight between the goldsmiths and the tailors in 1268. Company was chartered in 1233. The citizens of London had a common seal for the city. London merchants traveled throughout the nation with goods to sell exempt from tolls. Jews were allowed to make loans with interest up to 2d. There are three inns in London. One was a lunatic infirmary founded by the sheriff of London. London had been frequent. Mayor with the sheriffs and aldermen in attendance. Court took on the work which the weekly Husting could not manage. This consisted mostly of assault and robbery cases. Murder and manslaughter cases were left to the royal courts. There was much effort by the commoners to influence the governance of the city. Subsequent elections were tumultuous. Within this was an inner curtain wall with twelve towers and an inner moat. The fortress also served as a state prison. But occasionally prisoners were confined in irons in dark and damp dungeons. They would first wash their hands in hot water poured by servants over bowls. Each guest brought his own knife in a leather sheath attached to a belt or girdle. A wine cup was handed around the table. In the summer there were outdoor games and tournaments. Hunting with hounds or hawks was popular with both ladies and gentlemen. The King would go to bed on a feather mattress with fur coverlet that was surrounded by linen hangings. His grooms would sleep on trundle beds in the same room. The queen likewise shared her bedchamber with several of her ladies sleeping on trundle beds. Breakfast was comprised of a piece of bread and a cup of wine taken after the daily morning mass in one of the chapels. Sometimes a round and deep tub was brought into the bedchamber by servants who poured hot water onto the bather in the tub. Henry III was also noted for his luxurious tastes. English ships had one mast with a square sail. The hulls were made of planks overlapping each other. On the coasts there were lights and beacons. Harbors at river mouths were kept from silting up. Ships were loaded from piers. The construction of London Bridge had just been finished. Bricks began to be imported for building. Churches had stained glass windows. That none of them be distrained by any without the said city for the repayment of any debt to any person for which he is not capital debtor or surety. Tyne or any other minister shall not make a scotale. We have granted them also a merchant guild. This amount of money collected by this tax increased with the wealth of the country. Ships were impressed when needed. Sometimes private ships were authorized to ravage the French coasts and take what spoil they could. This led to the concept that they should not be chosen by the king alone. Statutes were enacted. Landholders were given the duty of electing four of their members in every county to ensure that the sheriff observed the law and to report his misdemeanors to the justiciar. They were also given the duty of electing four men from the county from whom the exchequer was to choose the sheriff of the year. The barons forced successive Kings to sign the Magna Carta until it became the law of the land. It became the first statute of the official statute book. Its provisions express the principle that a king is bound by the law and is not above it. The Magna Carta was issued by John in 1215. A revised version was issued by Henry III in 1225 with the forest clauses separated out into a forest charter. TO BE KEPT IN OUR KINGDOM OF ENGLAND FOREVER. English Church shall be free and enjoy her whole rights and her liberties inviolable. Charter we will both keep ourself and will it to be kept with good faith by our heirs forever. THE WARDSHIP OF AN HEIR WITHIN AGE. BEFORE THAT HE HAS TAKEN OF HIM HOMAGE. YET NEVERTHELESS HIS LAND SHALL REMAIN IN THE KEEPING OF HIS LORD UNTO THE AFORESAID TERM. AT THE LEAST AS HE RECEIVED IT. THAT SUCH CUSTODY SHALL NOT BE SOLD. Heirs shall be married without loss of station. AND THE DEBTOR HIMSELF IS READY TO SATISFY THEREFORE. So shall it be done with regard to debts owed persons other than Jews. So shall it be with regard to aids from the City of London. NONE SHALL DISTRAIN FOR MORE SERVICE THAN IS DUE. WHERE AND BEFORE WHOM ASSIZES SHALL BE TAKEN. AND THEY TOGETHER WITH KNIGHTS OF THAT COUNTY SHALL HOLD THE SAID ASSIZES IN THE COUNTY. SHALL BE REFERRED TO OUR JUSTICES OF THE BENCH AND THERE SHALL BE ENDED. ASSIZES OF DARREIN PRESENTMENT SHALL ALWAYS BE TAKEN BEFORE OUR JUSTICES OF THE BENCH AND THERE SHALL BE DETERMINED. None of these amercements shall be imposed except by the oath of honest men of the neighborhood. BUT NOT AFTER THE QUANTITY OF HIS SPIRITUAL BENEFICE. No town or freeman shall be compelled to build bridges over rivers OR BANKS except those bound by old custom and law to do so. BY THE SAME PLACES AND IN THE SAME BOUNDS AS IN HIS TIME. THIS APPLIES IF THE MAN IS NOT OF THE TOWN WHERE THE CASTLE IS. THE PRICE SHALL BE PAID TO HIM WITHIN 40 DAYS. NO DEMESNE CART OF ANY SPIRITUAL PERSON OR KNIGHT OR ANY LORD SHALL BE TAKEN BY OUR BAILIFFS. YARDS within the selvages. As with measures so shall it also be with weights. NONE SHALL BE CONDEMNED WITHOUT TRIAL. JUSTICE SHALL NOT BE SOLD OR DELAYED. Chief Justiciary how our merchants are being treated in the country at war with us. And we will hold the escheat in the same manner in which the baron held it. UNLESS HE WHO HELD THE BARONY OR ESCHEAT ELSEWHERE HELD OF US IN CHIEF. BUT SO THAT OF THE RESIDUE OF THE LANDS THE LORD OF THE FEE MAY HAVE THE SERVICE DUE TO HIM WHICH BELONGS TO THE FEE. All forests which have been created in our time shall forthwith be disafforested. So shall it be done with regard to river banks which have been enclosed by fences in our time. We will immediately return all hostages and charters delivered to us by Englishmen as security for the peace or for the performance of loyal service. THERE SHALL BE GREATER. AND AGAIN AFTER THE FEAST OF SAINT MICHAEL. OR WHICH HE HAS SINCE PURCHASED. MAKING IN THE TIME OF KING HENRY OUR GRANDFATHER. AND TO LEASE THE SAME TO HIM OF WHOM HE RECEIVED IT. AND THE LAND SHALL ACCRUE TO THE LORD OF THE FEE. Marches as to tenements in the Marches. The same shall the Welsh do to us and ours. Welsh and the aforesaid regions. WHICH THEY HAVE HAD IN TIME PASSED. SHALL OBSERVE THE SAME AGAINST ALL PERSONS IN LIKE WISE. HAVE GIVEN UNTO US THE FIFTEENTH PART OF ALL THEIR MOVEABLES. SHALL PROCURE OR DO ANY THING WHEREBY THE LIBERTIES IN THIS CHARTER CONTAINED SHALL BE INFRINGED OR BROKEN. IT SHALL BE HAD OF NO FORCE NOR EFFECT. Easter in the sixteenth year of our reign until the restoration of peace. June in the seventeenth year of our reign. THE ABBOT OF BOURGH ST. GIVEN AT WESTMINSTER THE 11TH DAY OF FEBRUARY THE 9TH YEAR OF OUR REIGN. FROM HENCEFORTH FIRMLY THEY BE OBSERVED. Widows may bequeath the crop of their ground as well of their dowers as of their other lands and tenements. Freeholders of tenements on manors shall have sufficient ingress and egress from their tenements to the common pasture and as much pasture as suffices for their tenements. The wards and escheats of the king shall be surveyed yearly by three people assigned by the King. The Sheriffs shall be answerable for the issues thereof in the Exchequer at designated times. The collectors of the customs on wool exports shall pay this money at the two designated times and shall make yearly accounts of all parcels in ports and all ships. The penalty is a fine according to the trespass. A fraudulent conveyance to a minor or lease for a term of years made to defraud a Lord of a wardship shall be void. A Lord who maliciously and wrongfully alleges this to a court shall pay damages and costs. No lord may distrain any of his tenants. No one may drive animals taken by distraint out of the county where they have been taken. Church law required that planned marriages be publically announced by the priest so that any impediment could be made known. It taught that dying without a will was sinful. He thought the deodand to be unreasonable. The justices were career civil servants knowledgeable in the civil and canon law. Its records were the coram rege rolls. The title of the Chief Justiciar of England changed to the Chief Justice of England. The Court of Common Pleas heard civil cases brought by one subject against another. Great Hall in Westminster. Bench over trespass cases. Its records were the de banco rolls. About the same time the presiding justice of the court of common pleas also came to be styled justiciar or chief justice. Apprentices at law learned pleading from them. Command Tertius that . Royal itinerant justices traveled to the counties every seven years. All boroughs had to send twelve burgesses who were to indict any burgesses suspected of breaking the royal law. Suspects were held in gaol until their cases could be heard and gaol breaks were common. The visitation of these justices was anticipated with trepidation. Cornwall hid in the woods rather than face the itinerant justices. Royal coroners held inquests on all sudden deaths to determine whether they were accidental or not. They also had duties in treasure trove and shipwreck cases. The traditional county courts had lost much jurisdiction to the royal courts and were now limited to personal actions in causes involving usually no more than 40s. The sheriff still constitutes and conducts the court. Everyone who held freehold land in the hundred except the greater magnates had to attend or be fined for absence. This applied to every boy who had reached the age of twelve. Each tithing man paid a penny to the sheriff. John Croc was drowned from his horse and cart in the water of Bickney. The price of the horse and cart is 4s. Willam Ruffus was crushed to death by a certain trunk. The price of the trunk is 4d. His chattels were 4 s. Chertsey is to answer. Courts awarded specific relief as well as money damages. The courts also ordered repair by a lessee. Proof was by compurgation. A church judge was required to employ a notary or two men to write down all acts of the judge and to give a copy to the parties to protect against unjust judges. No cleric was allowed to pronounce or execute a sentence of death or to take part in judicial tests or ordeals. Anyone knowingly accepting a stolen article was required to restore it to its owner. Heretics were to be excommunicated. The manor court imposed penalties on those who did not perform their services to the manor and the lord wrote down the customs of the manor for future use in other courts. Various statutes relaxed the requirements for attendance at court of those who were not involved in a case as long as there were enough to make the inquests fully. Prelates and barons were generally excepted from the county courts by the charters of their estates. Charters of boroughs often excepted their representatives at the county court when there were no justices. Some barons and knights paid the sheriff to be excused. The king often relieved the simple knights by special license. There was frequently a problem of not having enough knights to hold the assizes. Trespass has become a writ of course in the common law. One found guilty is fined and imprisoned. Ragenilda of Bec gives 2s. John Bisuthe and Gilbert Bisuthe who are sworn. And they say that the said Ragenilda has the greater right. Therefore let her have seisin. Saturday after the Purification of the Blessed Virgin. Richard Guest gives 12d. John Brook and Richard of Pinner. And Richard is not able to deny this. Walter Hulle gives 13s. And the said jurors come and say upon their oath that the said Geoffrey has no right in the said land. Therefore let the said tenants go thence without day and let the said Geoffrey pay 2s. Hugh Bussel and Godfrey Francis. And the said William put himself in mercy. And Gilbert and William come and defend all of it fully. And Hugh put himself in mercy. John Tailor and Walter Brother. John Witriche in mercy for carrying off thorns. Ralph Winbold and Walter Green. Richard Love gives 12d. Robert of Brockhole and Juliana his wife hold. Afterwards the jurors come and say upon their oath that the said Richard has the greater right in the said land. Therefore let him have seisin. William Blackbeard in mercy for not coming with his law as he was bound to do. Geoffrey of Wick and Geoffrey Payn. It was presented that Stephen Shepherd by night struck his sister with a knife and grievously wounded her. Therefore let him be committed to prison. Afterwards he made fine with 2s. Peter Burgess and in felony threw stones at his door so that the said Peter raised the hue. Therefore let the said Robert be committed to prison. Afterwards he made fine with 2s. Sir Thomas the Chaplain and forcibly expelled thence a man and woman who had been taken in there as guests. Therefore they are in mercy. Lortemere and Jordan of Paris. Adam Moses gives half a sextary of wine to have an inquest as to whether Henry Ayulf accused him of the crime of larceny and used opprobrious and contumelious words of him. Afterwards they made accord and Henry finds security for an amercement. Isabella Sywards in mercy for having sold to Richard Bodenham land that she could not warrant him. All the ploughmen of great Ogbourne are convicted by the oath of twelve men. Afterwards he made fine with the lord with 1 mark. From William Cooper 12d. From Richard Penant 12d. From Helen widow of Little Ogbourne 6d. From Nicholas Siward 6d. From William Pafey 12d. From the widow of Ralph Shepherd 6d. And the whole court say upon their oath that the said Richard has greater right in the said land than anyone else. Therefore let him recover his seisin. Latin translates as 4s. John Orped and Joce Serjeant. Herbert Rede and Ralph Brunild. He loved his people and wanted them to love him. He came to the throne with twenty years experience governing lesser lands on the continent which were given to him by his father Henry III. He gained a reputation as a lawgiver and as a peacemaker in disputes on the continent. His reputation was so high and agreement on him as the next king so strong that England was peaceful in the almost two years that it took him to arrive there from continental business. He was loyal to his close circle of good friends. He valued honor and adhered reasonably well to the terms of the treaties he made. He was generous in carrying out the royal custom of subsidizing the feeding of paupers. He disliked ceremony and display. They were the basis of reforms which improved justice at the local as well as the national level. They also rationalized the array of jurisdictions that had grown up with feudal government. Wardships of children and widows were sought because they were very profitable. A guardian could get one tenth of the income of the property during the wardship and a substantial marriage amount when the ward married. Parents often made contracts to marry for their young children. This avoided a forced marriage by a ward should the parents die. Most earldoms and many baronages came into the royal house by escheat or marriage. The royal house employed many people. The barons developed a class consciousness of aristocracy and became leaders of society. About half of the knights were literate. At these knights competed for the affection of ladies by jousting with each other while the ladies watched. Courtly romances were common. Romantic stories were at the height of their popularity. A usual theme was the lonely quest of a knight engaged in adventures which would impress his lady. A pear tree bears all the fruit a pear tree can bear and did not bear pears. It bore only one pear. The dress of the higher classes was very changeable and subject to fashion as well as function. Overtunics were often lined or trimmed with native fur such as squirrel. Only monks and friars wore brown. This resulted in an uninterrupted spinning motion which was not interrupted by alternately forming the thread and winding it on the spindle. All officers of the household were gentlemen. A nobleman and his lady had a circle of knights and gentlemen and their ladies. A knight had a circle of gentlemen and their ladies. The great barons lived in houses built within the walls of their castles. Windows came down almost to the floor. The hall had a raised floor at one end where the lord and lady and a few others sat at a high table. The hearth was in the middle of the room or on a wall. Sometimes a cat was used to open and shut the louvers of the smoke outlet in the roof. The many knights usually lived in unfortified houses with two rooms. The tables were lit with candles or torches made of wax. Plates were gold and silver. On this high table was a large and elaborate salt cellar. A yeoman cellarer or butler served the wine and beer. The steward presided over the table of household officers of gentle birth. Salt and spices were available at all tables. A marshall and ushers kept order. Minstrels played musical instruments or recited histories of noble deeds or amusing anecdotes. Reading aloud was a favorite pastime. They often shared plates and drinking vessels at the table. She patronized Oxford and Cambridge Universities and left bequests to poor scholars there. She was kind and thoughtful towards those about her and was also sympathetic to the afflicted and generous to the poor. Edward granted her many wardships and marriages and she arranged marriages with political advantages. She dealt with envoys coming to the court. Her intellectual vitality and organized mentality allowed her to deal with arising situations well. Edward held her in great esteem. She and Edward often played games of chess and backgammon. Farm efficiency was increased by the use of windmills in the fields to pump water and by allowing villeins their freedom and hiring them as laborers only when needed. Customary service was virtually extinct. A strong man with a wife to do the binding could do this in a long harvest day. Then the price of wheat went way up and drove up the prices of all other goods correspondingly. This Robin Hood did not give to the poor. The population grew and all arable land in the nation came under the plough. The acre was standardized. Trade and the towns grew. Smiths used coal in their furnaces. Sometimes land is granted to strangers because none of the kindred of the deceased will take it. Often a manor court limited a fee in land to certain issue instead of being inheritable by all heirs. This resulted in survey maps showing villages and cow pastures. He shall cart to Norwich six cartings or shall give 9d. Also he shall flail for twelve days or give 12d. For carting manure he shall give 2. Wednesday following the feast of St. John Pollard holds a half acre in Aldithewisse and owes 18d. John Suthinton holds a house and 40 acres of land and owes 3s. Easter and Michaelmas. William of Swynham holds one acre of meadow in the thicket of Swynham and owes 1d. Ralph of Leybourne holds a cottage and one acre of land in Pinden and owes 3s. Richard Knyst of Swynham holds two acres and a half of land and owes yearly 4s. William of Knelle holds two acres of land in Aldithewisse and owes yearly 4s. Roger le Glede holds a cottage and three roods of land and owes 2s. Easter and Michaelmas. Alexander Hamound holds a little piece of land near Aldewisse and owes one goose of the value of 2d. Christmas of the value of 4d. Thus his harrowing is of no value to the service of the lord. And thus the service is worth 3d. And he is to receive each day three meals of the value given above. And thus that mowing is worth 4d. And he shall receive from the lord each day three meals of the value given above. And thus the work is worth 7d. And he shall receive from the lord each day three meals of the price given above. And thus the work is worth 4d. Thus that mowing is worth nothing to the service of the lord. And he shall receive in the manor each time one meal of the value of 2d. And thus the work is worth 2d. The total of the value of the works is 2s. William of Cayworth holds a house and 30 acres of land and owes at Easter and Michaelmas 2s. And he shall do all customs just as the aforesaid John of Cayworth. William atte Grene holds a house and 30 acres of land and owes in all things the same as the said John. Easter and Michaelmas 4s. John Lyllingwyst holds a house and four acres of land and owes at the two terms 2s. The same John holds one acre of land in the fields of Hoo and owes at the two periods 2s. Reginald atte Denne holds a house and 18 acres of land and owes at the said periods 18d. Walter Herying holds a cottage and a piece of land and owes at Easter and Michaelmas 18d. Isabella Mariner holds a cottage and owes at the feast of St. Easter and Michaelmas 2s. William of Batelesmere holds one acre of land with a cottage and owes at the feast of St. Christmas of the value of 3d. John le Man holds half an acre of land with a cottage and owes at the feast of St. Hohn Werthe holds one rood of land with a cottage and owes at the said term 18d. Geoffrey Caumbreis holds half an acre and a cottage and owes at the said term 18d. William Hassok holds one rood of land and a cottage and owes at the said term 18d. Thomas le Brod holds one acre and a cottage and owes at the said term 3s. Agnes of Cayworth holds half an acre and a cottage and owes at the said term 18d. John of Cayworth and the rest of the villeins above mentioned. Most villeins did not venture beyond their village except for about ten miles to a local shrine or great fair a couple times a year. Early apothecaries might sell potions there. Men and women looking for other employment might attend to indicate their availability. This religion brought comfort and hope of going to heaven after judgment by God at death if sin was avoided. Priests sang prayers amid burning incense for the deliverance of the soul to God while interring the coffin into the ground. Men who did not make a will risked the danger of an intestate and unconfessed death. Many new boroughs were founded as grants of market rights by the king grew in number. It was the charter which distinguished the borough community from the other communities existing in the country. It invested each borough with a distinct character. The privileges which the charter conferred were different in different places. The craftsman might also employ men for just a day. A borough was run by a mayor elected usually for life. Each guild occupied a certain ward of the town headed by an alderman. No longer were towns dominated by the local landholders. Another wall and a moat were built around it and it has reached its final form. London streets were paved with cobbles and sand. Each citizen was to keep the street in front of his tenement in good repair. The repair of Bishopsgate was the responsibility of the Bishop because he received one stick from every cart of firewood passing through it. Rules as to tiled roofs were enforced. Prostitutes were expelled from the city because the street with their bawdy houses had become very noisy. Each ward chose certain of its inhabitants to be councilors to the aldermen. This council was to be consulted by him and its advice to be followed. Craftsmen began to take other public offices too. No longer could one simply purchase citizenship. Fighting among groups was common in London. Much blood was shed in the street battle between the skinners and the fishmongers in 1340. It remained in his family for 80 years. There was a problem with malefactors committing offenses in London and avoiding its jurisdiction by escaping to Southwark across the Thames. So Southwark was given a royal charter which put it under the jurisdiction of London for peace and order matters and allowed London to appoint its tax collector. About 280 Jews and many Englishmen were found guilty and hanged. This was popular with the public because of the abuses of usury. There had been outbreaks of violence directed at the Jews since about 1140. The king used Italian bankers instead because he thought them more equitable in their dealings. The lepers were driven out of London in 1276. Exports and imports were no longer a tiny margin in an economy just above the subsistence level. Many duties of sheriffs and coroners were transferred to county landholders by commissions. By 1306 there was an office of admiral of the fleet of the ships of the southern ports. Women could inherit land in certain circumstances. Some tenants holding land in chief of the king were women. Regulation of trade became national instead of local. Responsibility for the coinage was transferred from the individual moneyers working in different boroughs to a central official who was to become Master of the Mint. Edward I called meetings of representatives from all social and geographic sectors of the nation at one Parliament to determine taxes due to the Crown. The Model Parliament of 1295 was composed of the three communities. The great barons were chosen by the king and received a special summons in their own names to the council or Parliament. Others were called by a general summons. The third community was the commons. The country people and the town people also had a community of interest by both being encompassed by the county courts. The peasants were not represented in the county courts nor in Parliament. Parliaments without knights and burgesses still met with the king. But it was understood that no extraordinary tax could be levied without the knights and burgesses present. The higher clergy remained in Parliament because they were feudal vassals of the king. The council assisted the king in considering petitions. These groups sometimes formed alliances in a common cause. Women sometimes petitioned. Many hours were spent hearing and answering petitions. The king still exercised the power of legislation without a full Parliament. He might in his council issue proclamations. There was no convention that agreement or even the presence of representatives was required for legislation. The idea that the present can bind the absent and that the majority of those present may outvote the minority was beginning to take hold. These were in addition to other matters sworn to by the councilors. Parliament soon was required to meet at least once a year at the Great Hall at Westminster beside the royal palace. London paid its representatives 10s. Chancellor sat on the left and the Archbishop of Canterbury on the right of the king. Just below and in front of the king his council sits on wool sacks brought in for their comfort from wool stored nearby. The first legislation proposed by the commons was alteration of the forest laws governing the royal pleasure parks. Parliament initiated customs duties of 6s. These goods had to be assessed and collected at certain designated ports. Edward I confirmed the Magna Carta and other items. Judgments contrary to Magna Carta were nullified. The documents were to be read in cathedral churches as grants of Edward and all violators were to be excommunicated. The customs tax was finally fixed at 10s. France when the king did not go. Statute Roll as they were enacted. The keeper of the privy seal was established as a new office by Edward I in 1318. It traveled with the King. The people in the entourage rode horses or walked. Many of the chancellors had come from the wardrobe and chamber. The king used a privy seal to issue directives to the chancery. Edward III made some merchants earls and appointed them to be his ministers. There was a recoinage due to debasement of the old coinage. This increased the number of coins in circulation. The price of wheat went from about 7s. Also the price of an ox went from 14s. Wheat prices peaked at 15s. The poor were hurt by high prices and the lords of the manors were hurt by low prices. Accidents and disease were so prevalent that death was always near and life insecure. Many women died in childbirth. Both men and women wore belts low on the hips. A jeweled circlet was often worn around her head. A man wore a knife and a bag on his belt. Some people kept dogs purely as pets. They descended through families. Parliamentary consent came to be expected for such. He completed the conquest and annexation of Wales in 1284. There had been much competition between the strength of arrows to pierce and the heaviness of armor to resist. Guns and cannon with gunpowder were introduced in 1338. A system to raise an army by contract was developed. He eventually was assassinated. Parliament required the king to obtain its consent for any exchange or alteration of the currency. London had become so powerful that they extracted a charter from the king that to be a citizen of London one had to be a member of a guild. Italy was famous for its glasswork. The first eyeglasses were fabricated by pouring molten glass into curved molds. The actual shape was difficult to control because thermal expansion and contraction resulted in bubbles and other optical imperfections. But no cloth was to be exported until it was fulled. Flanders weavers were encouraged to come to England to teach the English how to weave and finish fine cloth. The best places were hilly areas where there were many streams and good pasture for flocks of sheep. The shaft loom was a technological advance in weaving. This left both hands free to throw and catch the shuttle attached to the weft thread from side to side through the warp. Also many more weaving patterns became possible through the use of different thread configurations on the frames. King Edward III and council to approve their petition when Parliament was still in session so that they would draft the legislation in true accordance with the petition. Also the lords and commons consulted each other and joined in petitions. But they usually stated their conclusions to the king separately. It was considered a burden rather than a privilege to attend Parliament and elections for such were not often contested. They were conducted according to local custom until 1600. This began the practice of appropriation of funds. Parliament for both receipts and disbursements. Edward I remodeled the law in response to grievances and to problems which came up in the courts. The changes improved the efficiency of justice and served to accommodate it to the changing circumstances of the social system. Young salmon shall not be taken from waters in the spring. No loan shall be made for interest. A conveyance of land which is the inheritance of a minor child by his guardian or lord to another is void. Dower shall not abate because the widow has received dower of another man unless part of the first dower received was of the same tenant and in the same town. But a woman who leaves her husband for another man is barred from dower. Promises under oath were not recognized for married women. A conveyance or agreement of a married woman was void. This was called a fee simple conditional holding of land. This curtailed the advantage of tenants of the greater barons who profited by increased wardships and reliefs from subinfeudation from subdivision and better cultivation of their land while still paying the greater barons fixed sums. This statute that protected reversionary estates incidentally established a system of entails. No grantee or his heirs could alienate the land held in fee tail. The donor could give directions that the land could remain to another person rather than reverting to himself. England and the continent through Kent. Anyone disseising another whereby he also robs him or uses force and arms in the disseisin shall be imprisoned and fined. The plaintiff shall recover seisin and damages. A Lord defaulting shall lose his franchise to the King. They must join the military to fight on the borders when called. Desertion from the army is punishable. Accessories to a crime shall not be declared outlaw before the principal is proven guilty. This made uniform the practice of the various counties. But a private accuser can still sue. The criminal penalty used to be just two years in prison. Trespasses in parks or ponds shall be punished by imprisonment for three years and a fine as well as paying damages to the wronged person. Anyone doing so shall be imprisoned until he brings into the court the first author of the tale. A system of registration and enforcement of commercial agreements was established by statute. Anyone making those passing with goods through their jurisdiction answer to them in excess of their jurisdiction shall be grievously amerced to the King. No market town shall take an outrageous toll contrary to the common custom of the nation. Anyone bringing money into the nation must have it examined at his port of entry. A currency exchange was established at Dover for the exchange of foreign currency for English sterling. The gold in craftwork must meet the standard of the Touch of Paris. The assize of bread and ale had been and was enforced locally by local inspectors. Crown appointed royal officers for the gauge of wines and measurement of cloths. Forest to feed in their own woods or elsewhere. Each borough has its own civil and criminal ordinances and police jurisdiction. Only borough courts have jurisdiction over fairs. In some boroughs the villein who resides for a year and a day becomes free. There are special ordinances relating to apprentices. There are sometimes ordinances against enticing away servants bound by agreement to serve another. Boroughs often had seals to prove communal consent and tended to act as a corporate body. An attempt to do so will cause the land to revert to the donor or his heir. Land may not be alienated to religious bodies in such a way that it would cease to render its due service to the King. The church shall send no money out of the nation. London and the continent. The goods of a deceased person were divided into three parts after his funeral expenses and debts were paid. One third went to the surviving spouse. One third could be disposed by will of the decedent. A wife who remarried or bore a child lost her dower land. A husband lost his dower if he remarried. Common Pleas for examination and interpretation as to whether they were going beyond their charters and infringing upon the jurisdiction of the Royal Court. Crown and not kept by the lords. The supreme court was the king and his council in Parliament. The office of great justiciar disappears and the chancellor becomes the head of the council. The Court of Common Pleas had its own Chief Justice and usually met at Westminster. Westminster to present a case. Court of Common Pleas. It traveled with the King. There were many trespass cases so heard by it in the reign of Edward I. Its procedure was to send for the accused and compel him to answer upon oath written interrogatories. Affidavits were then sworn upon both sides. No loss of life or limb occurred because there had been no jury. The men of the petty jury as well as those of the grand jury were expected to know or to acquaint themselves with the facts of the cases. The men of the petty jury tended to be the same men who were on the grand jury. Murder still meant secret homicide. These six offenses could be prosecuted by indictment or private accusation by an individual. Notorious felons who would not consent or put themselves on inquests for felonies with which they were charged at royal courts were put in strong and hard imprisonment to persuade them to accept trial by assize. This inducement progressed into being loaded with heavy chains and placed on the ground in the worst part of the prison and being fed a only little water one day and a little bread the next. Sometimes pieces of iron or stones were placed one another onto their prone bodies to persuade them to plead. The itinerant justices gradually ceased to perform administrative duties on their journeys because landed society had objected to their intrusiveness. Edward I substituted regular visitations of justices of assize for the irregular journeys of the itinerant justices. Each one of four circuits had two justices of assize. He had plotted to kill the King. The head was placed on the Tower of London and his body sections were placed in public view at various other locations in England. Defendants no longer request assizes but are automatically put to them. This law was not obeyed. The most common plea in the hundred court was trespass. It met every three weeks. The sheriff held his turn twice a year and viewed frankpledge once a year. Sometimes there are questions of a breach of warranty of title in agreements of sale of land. The courts did rough but substantial justice without distinction between concepts such as tort and contract. It required a writing under seal and awarded damages. The steward holding the manor court was often a lawyer. Hugh Hall gives the lord 12d. And the court says that the tenement and one of the two acres are of servile condition and that the other acre is of free condition. William Ketelburn gives the lord 6s. For the common fine to be paid on S. John Mabely gives the lord 3s. Agnes Stampelove gives the lord 2s. Godfrey for himself and his heirs remises to the said Noah and his heirs all right and claim which he has or can have in the said farthing land by reason of the gift made by his grandfather John Tailor. John son of Alma demands a cottage which Henry Fleming holds and gives the lord 12d. The jurors say that Henry Fleming has the better right. Simon Patrick gives the lord 12d. The said jurors say that the said Simon has the better right. Juliana Forester gives the lord 12d. Henry Cross gives the lord 4s. Isabella Warin gives the lord 4s. And for the making of this inquest the said William gives the lord 6s. Richard be distrained. He has made fine with 12d. Alan Reaper gives the lord 12d. Eleanor Mead make default. Maud widow of Reginald of Challow has sufficiently proved that a certain sheep valued at 8d. The Court of Hustings in London is empowered to award landlords their tenements for which rent or services are in arrears if the landlord could not distrain enough tenant possessions to cover the arrearages. Some men died in the pillory of shame and distress. A variation of the pillory was being dragged through the streets on a hurdle. The death penalty was usually by hanging. The defendant acknowledged the trespass. Judgment that he remain in the custody of the Sheriff till he satisfy the King and the Court for offense. The defendants denied that they were guilty and put themselves on their country. This Recognizance arose out of a covenant between them with regard to the effecting of a cure. Both were amerced for coming to an agreement out of Court. Peter was fitted to enjoy the profession of a surgeon. A professional class of temporal attorneys whose business it is to appear on behalf of litigants is prominent in the nation. Year Books of case decisions. Parliament refers difficult points of law to them as well as to the justices. These reports became so authoritative that they could be cited in the courts as precedent. Thus they became educational institutions as well as clubs for practicing attorneys. The call to the bar of an Inn was in effect a degree. To be an attorney one had to be educated and certified at the Inns of Court. They practice law full time. Some are employed by the King. All attorneys were brought under the control of the justices. The black blotches were caused by extensive internal bleeding. People tried to avoid the plague by flight. The agony and death of so many good people caused some to question their belief in God. Customary ways were so upset that authority and tradition were no longer automatically accepted. Fields lay waste and sheep and cattle wandered over the countryside. Local courts could seldom be held. Guilds and rich men made contributions to the poor and ships with provisions were sent to various parts of the country for the relief of starving people. Prices did not go up nearly as much as wages. The Robin Hood legends were popular among them. Robin Hood is pure outlaw and does not contribute money to the poor. Nor does he court Maid Marion. Justices became afraid to administer the law. The office of Justice of the Peace was created for every county to deal with rioting and vagrants. Cooperation by officials of other counties was mandated to deal with fugitives from its justice. The Black Death visited again in 1361 and in 1369. It was to rise to about 4 million by 1600. Each area had its own specific grievances. The upper classes fled to the woods. Title deeds of landlords were burned. Rate rolls of general taxation were destroyed. Prisoners were released from gaols. The Chief Justice was murdered while fleeing. Severed heads were posted on London Bridge. The revolt was suppressed and its leaders punished. The king issued proclamations forbidding unauthorized gatherings and ordering tenants of land to perform their customary services. The poll tax was dropped. Justices of the Peace. There was a high Peace in each hundred and a petty constable in each parish. Justices of the Peace could swear in neighbors as unpaid special constables when disorder broke out. Crown revenue through his bailiffs. Royal writs were addressed to the sheriff. Efforts were made to keep laborers at the plough and cart rather than learn a craft or entering and being educated by the church. The new colleges at the universities ceased to accept villeins as students. But some found new methods of using land that were more profitable than the customary services of villeins who had holdings of land or the paid labor of practically free men who paid a money rent for land holdings. One method was to turn the land to sheep breeding. Landlords preferred to lease their land at will instead of for a term of years to prevent the tenant from depleting the soil with a few richer crops during the last years of his tenancy. The commutation of labor services into a money payment developed into a general commutation of virtually all services. Lords in need of money gladly sold manumissions to their villeins. The great chamber was usually at the dais end of tahe great hall. The great hall had been too noisy for conversation and now was little used. Some farmers achieved enough wealth to employ others as laborers on their farms. The peasants ate dark bread and beans and drank water from springs. Milk and cheese were a luxury for them. July was the month when the divide between rich and poor became most apparent. Grain and bread prices soared during July. Farming still occupied the vast majority of the population. Town inhabitants and university students went into the fields to help with the harvest in the summer. Parliament was suspended during the harvest. Town people had more wealth than country people. Beds were made every morning. Tubs used only for baths came into use. Menus were put together with foods that tasted well together and served on plates in several courses. Sheffield cutlery was world famous. There were books on etiquette. Ancient and Honorable Order of the Men Who Stroke Cats. An incoming burgess was required to buy his right to trade either by way of a seven year apprenticeship or by payment of an entry fee. The right of London to pass ordinances was confirmed by charter. The smiths and potters were excluded from the more densely populated areas because they were fire risks. Water carriers carried water in wooden devices on their backs to houses. The paving and proper drainage of the streets became a town concern. Stairwells between floors had narrow and winding steps. They were authorized to bestow livery on their members and were called Livery Companies. Craft guilds were gaining much power relative to the old merchant guilds in governing the towns. The guild was not necessarily associated with a specific product. It was a long custom in London that freemen in one company could practice the trade of another company. There were paint mills and saw mills replacing human labor. There were apothecary shops and women surgeons. The guild officers sat as a guild court to determine discipline for offences such as false weights or measures or false workmanship or work and decided trade disputes. They were expected to contribute to the support of the sick and impoverished in their fellowship. Their code required social action such as ostracizing a man of the craft who was living in adultery until he mended his ways. None but a freeman of the city shall make or sell gloves. No glover may be admitted to the freedom of the city unless with the assent of the wardens of the trade. No one shall entice away the servant of another. Any false work found shall be taken before the mayor and aldermen by the wardens. All things touching the trade within the city between those who are not freemen shall be forfeited. Journeymen shall be paid their present rate of wages. Persons who entice away journeymen glovers to make gloves in their own houses shall be brought before the mayor and aldermen. Any one of the trade who refuses to obey these regulations shall be brought before the mayor and aldermen. Chamber the sum above mentioned. Smithfield was a field outside the city gates at which horses were sold and raced. On Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Smithfield from time to time during such term of three years when necessary. There were windows of glass and a guild of glaziers was chartered by the King. Their goods were displayed on a booth outside the door of the house or hung in the windows. They were stored at night in the cellar. There were no sidewalks. Street repair work for wages was supervised by a stone master. The streets sloped down from the middle so that the filth of the streets would run down the sides of the road. There were many wood chips in the streets due to cutting up of firewood before taking it indoors. People often threw the rubbish from their houses onto the street although they were supposed to cart it outside the city walls and to clean the frontage of their houses once a week. Dustmen scavenged through the rubbish on the streets. Wards provided citizens to guard the gates in their respective neighborhood and keep its key. Crime in London was rare. There was an ordinance passed against prostitutes in 1351. Prominent Londoners sought to elevate their social position by having their family marry into rural landholders of position. Church steeples now had clocks on them with dials and hands to supplement the church bell ringing on the hour. Alabaster was often used for sepulchral monuments instead of metal or stone. Towns recognized surgery as a livelihood subject to admission and oath to serve the social good. Some young girls of good families were boarded at nunneries to be taught there. Some upper class widows retired there. Various ways to prevent pregnancy were tried. Infant mortality was especially high in boroughs and burgess family lines usually died out. The grammar schools taught in English instead of Norman as of 1362. Bishops began to preach in English. And I will that my said two sons shall live upon the profits of the money bequeathed to them above until the age of twenty years. I will that he receive nothing more of the said five marks. I will that thereupon he be excluded from the said five marks. All Hallows for my soul. England was still an agricultural rather than a manufacturing country. Merchant adventurers came to manufacture cloth good enough for export and began to buy up raw wool in such quantity that its export declined. He opined that the church had no power to excommunicate. The friars had become mere beggars and the church was still wealthy. He proposed that all goods should be held in common by the righteous and that the church should hold no property but be entirely spiritual. He believed that people should rely on their individual consciences. He thought that the Bible should be available to people who could read English so that the people could have a direct access to God without priests or the pope. Latin into English in 1384. His preachers spread his views throughout the country. God might cause a person to think that he has intuitive knowledge of an existent object when there is in fact no such object. Most great lords were literate. Stories were written about pilgrimage vacations of ordinary people to religious sites in England. Truth led by a virtuous laborer. Geoffrey Chaucer was a squire and diplomat of the king. Robin Hood ballads were popular. There were many colleges at Oxford and Cambridge due to the prohibition of gifts to the church. Laymen instead of ecclesiastics were appointed as Chancellor. The Masters at Oxford got rid of ecclesiastical supervision by a bishop and archdeacon by 1368. One could be admitted as a student at age thirteen. The rate of maintenance for a student was 10d. A Bachelor of Arts degree was granted after four years of study and an oral exam. A Master of Arts degree could be awarded after three more years of study and teaching. A Doctorate degrees in theology required ten more years of study. A Doctorate in civil or canon law required eight more years. Urinalysis and pulse beat were used for diagnosis. Epilepsy and apoplexy were understood as spasms inside the head. It was known what substances served as laxatives and diuretics. The requirements of elementary and higher studies were adjusted in 1393 and began the public school system. Mary College of Winchester in Oxford was the prototype. Laymen instead of clerics were now appointed to the great offices of state. Parliament met about twice a year and lasted from two weeks to several months. Parliament and who composed a House of Lords. All peers had the right to approach the king with advice. Parliament in her stead. The dukes and marquesses were identified with a territorial designation such as an English county or county town. Whenever a Parliament was assembled the commons were present. The commons was composed of representatives from 100 boroughs and 37 counties. Each new Parliament required an election of representatives. The electors were usually influenced by the sheriff or a powerful lord who suggested suitable men. The wealthy merchants typically represented the boroughs and paid much of the taxes. The speaker came to be an intermediary between the Commons and the king and between the Commons and the Lords. A clerk of Parliament registered its acts and sat with the Lords. A clerk of the Crown superintended the issue of writs and the receipt of the returns and attested the signature of the king on statutes. It became a regular practice for the Chancellor to open Parliament with an opportunity to present petitions after his opening speech. Parliament gradually decreased. This established the constitutional means for impeachment and prosecution by the Commons and removal by the House of Lords of ministers. The Commons demanded that its members be elected by county citizens rather than appointed by the sheriff. Sheriffs dealt directly with the king instead of through an earl. England was protected by the sea from invasion. So misgovernment by a king would be quickly restrained. Society recovered quickly from conflict and civil war because the national wealth consisted chiefly in flocks and herds and in the simple buildings inhabited by the people. Wool exports were inspected for quality and taxed through his officials only at the designated staple ports. The staple statute remained basically unchanged for the next 200 years. The mayor and constables of the staple were elected annually by the native and foreign merchants of the place. Merchants of the Staple. Guns and cannon were common by 1372. The fighting men supplemented their pay by plunder. Featherbeds and blooded horses were favorite spoils of war brought back to England from the continent. And he shall be boarded as well in time of peace as of war. Easter and Michaelmas by even portions yearly for the whole of his life. Forecastles and stern castles on ships were lower and broader. Underneath them were cabins. The English ship was still single masted with a single square sail. A fleet was formed with over 200 ships selected by the English admirals acting for the king at the ports. Tower of London had four mounted fortress cannon and the port of Dover had six. But the better policing of the narrow seas made piracy almost disappear. English merchants may carry their merchandise in foreign ships if there are no English ships available. But the council may restrain this passage when necessary for the good of the nation. All stakes and obstacles set up in rivers impeding the passage of boats shall be removed. Waterpower was replacing foot power in driving the mills where cloth was cleaned and fulled. A boundary dispute between two barons resulted in the first true survey map. Nine cow pastures were divided by a boundary marked by a shield on a pole which the commission of true and sworn men had set up. Parliament and declared certain statutes which he claimed to have been forced on him to be revoked. He interfered with county elections of knights to Parliament by directing sheriffs to return certain named persons. He wanted to dispense altogether with Parliament and instead have a committee of representatives. He claimed that the goods of his subjects were his own and illegally taxed the counties. There were many disputes as to who should be his ministers. He took possession of the Lancaster estates to which Henry was heir and forbade this inheritance. This made all propertied men anxious and they united behind Bolingbroke in taking up arms against Richard. Richard was not a warrior king and offered to resign the crown. Parliament deposed and imprisoned Richard. It revoked the extensions to the definition of high treason. Parliament was necessary in determining kingship. The House of Commons became very powerful. It was responsible for the major part of legislation. Henry IV agreed to their request not to consider reports of proceedings unless they came to him through official channels. The penalty was forfeit of life and lands. Preachers drawing crowds by ingenious sermons and inciting them to riot shall be arrested by sheriffs and tried by the ecclesiastical court. Any stranger passing at night of whom any have suspicion shall be arrested and taken to the Sheriff. Men who rape and women consenting after a rape shall lose their inheritance and dower and joint feoffments. The penalty is loss of life and member. It also encouraged longer terms of employment as in the past rather than for a day at a time. Statutory price controls on food limited profits to reasonable ones according to the distance of the supply. Children who labored at the plough and cart or other agriculture shall continue in that labor and may not go into a craft. This was repealed a year later. The fares for passage on boats on fresh waters and from Dover to the continent shall remain at their old rate. Any merchant selling at a fair after it has ended will forfeit to the king twice the value of that sold. They must sell their goods within three months of arrival. Towns failing to bring disturbers of this right to justice shall forfeit their franchise to the king and pay double damages to the merchant. The disturber shall be imprisoned for a year. Special streets or warehouses were appointed with warehouse rent fixed by the mayor and constables with four of the principal inhabitants. Customs duties were regulated and machinery provided for their collection. Forestallers were those who bought raw material on its way to market. Social distinctions by attire were mandated by statute of 1363. Craftsmen and free peasants shall only wear cloth worth no more than 40s. The penalty is forfeiture of such apparel. No laborer or any other man who does not have lands and tenements of the value of 40s. The rabbit had been introduced by the Normans. This 1390 law was primarily intended to stop the meetings of laborers and artificers. The penalty for bringing false or counterfeit money into the nation is loss of life and member. No foreign money may be used in the nation. No one shall give anything to a beggar who is capable of working. And every constable and the beadle of every ward of the said city shall be empowered to arrest such manner of folks and to put them in the stocks in manner aforesaid. No man will be charged to go out of his county to do military service except in case of an enemy invasion of the nation. Stealing a boat or an anchor holding a boat was punishable by hanging. Desertion was punishable by loss of double the amount of wages earned and imprisonment for one year. There was no salary nor any requirement of knowledge of the law. They were expected to arrest vagrants who would not work and imprison them until sureties for good behavior was found for them. They also were empowered to inspect weights and measures. The action of trespass was replacing private suits for murder and for personal injury. Justices of the Peace and mayors shall have power to inquire of all vagabonds and compel them to find surety of their good bearing or be imprisoned. A person in debt may not avoid his creditors by giving his tenements or chattels to his friends in collusion to have the profits at their will. Actions of debt will be heard only in the county where the contract was made. Thus there is a growing connection between the actions of debt and contract. Such administrators shall have the same powers and duties as executors and be accountable as are executors to the ecclesiastical court. Children born to English parents in parts beyond the sea may inherit from their ancestors in the same manner as those born in the nation. Bench worked independently of the King. It was exceptional to find the king sitting on his bench. It became confined to the established common law. Decisions of the common law courts are appealable to the House of Lords. House of Lords only as mere assistants. Parliament can change the common law by statute. The right of a peer to be tried for capital crimes by a court composed of his peers was established. No attorney may practice law and also be a justice of assize. No justice may take any gift except from the king nor give counsel to any litigant before him. The Chancery came to have a separate and independent equitable jurisdiction. Chancery was given equity jurisdiction by statute in 1285. Parliament may create new remedies. Chancellor made decisions implementing the policy of the Statute of Laborers. He imposed a legal duty on innkeepers to prevent injury or damage to a patron or his goods from third parties. A dog bite or other damage by a dog known by its owner to be vicious was made a more serious offense than general damage by any dog. A person starting a fire was given a duty to prevent the fire from damaging property of others. Chancellor by due process. Only barons who were peers of the House of Lords were entitled to trial in the House of Lords. It was often used for political purposes. Most attainders were reversed as a term of peace made between competing factions. I have stolen eighteen beasts from divers men in the said county. Lewes and that I am a felon of the lord King of England. The defendant denied the trespass and put himself on the country. Judgment was given for that amount and a fine of 1s. John Pusele is bound to the same William in 800s. John at Southwark And the said John . William in the said inn were carried away by the said John his servant or any strange malefactors other than the persons of the household of the said William. Baddele says Mark Faire of Winchester was prosecuting a bill of debt for 18s. Mayor and the constables issued a writ of capias against Edmund and John to answer Mark and be before the Mayor and the constables at the next court. Maud and the others say they aided Baddele by virtue of the said writ. Edmund does not acknowledge Baddele to be sergeant of the staple or Mark a merchant of the staple or that he was taken in the staple. Every servant of the court is under special protection while doing his duty or on his way to do it. William took him in the presence of the said justice and imprisoned him. The case is adjourned for consideration from Hilary to Easter. A law of equity began to be developed from decisions by the Chancellor in his court of conscience from around 1370. One such case was that of Godwyne v. Profyt sometime after 1393. Chancellor of England. Peter at More in his lifetime enfeoffed Thomas Profyt parson of St. Southwerk and 24 acres of land 6 acres of meadow in the said parish of St. Thomas Profyt swore on his Verbum Dei and to perform the said conditions on all points. God and in way of holy charity. War of the Roses over the throne in England. All the great houses kept bands of armed retainers. The liveries became the badges of the factions engaged in the War of the Roses. Lancaster for the Crown. Great lords fought each other for property and made forcible entries usurping private property. The existence of cannon also limited the usefulness of town walls for defense. But townspeople did not take part in the fighting. Families engaged in blood feuds. Some men made a living by fighting for others in quarrels. Individual life and property were insecure. Whole districts were in a permanent alarm of riot and robbery. The roads were not safe. Nobles employed men who had returned from fighting in war to use their fighting skill in local defense. Local administration was paralyzed by party faction or lodged in some great lord or some clique of courtiers. The elections of members to Parliament was interfered with and Parliament was rarely held. Barons and earls fought their disputes in the field rather than in the royal courts. Local men involved in court functions usually owed allegiance to a lord which compromised the exercise of justice. Men serving in an assize often lied to please their lord instead of telling the truth. It was not unusual for lords to attend court with a great force of retainers behind them. Many justices of the peace wore liveries of magnates and accepted money from them. Royal justices were flouted or bribed. Parliament and the council. She taught the children. She was nurse to all around her. The wives of barons shared their right of immunity from arrest by the processes of common law and to be tried by their peers. Her skirt was provocatively slit from knee to ankle. All her hair was confined by a hair net. Men also wore hats rather than hoods. They wore doublets with thick padding over the shoulders or short tunics over the trucks of their bodies and tightened at the waist to emphasize the shoulders. Their collars were high. Both men and women wore much jewelry and ornamentation. There was often a bay or oriel window with still expensive glass. A knights table was waited on by yeomen. The amount of food dished out to each person varied according to his rank. Then the musicians were called into the hall and dancing began. The lord usually slept in a great bed in this room. Cattle and sheep were driven from Wales to English markets. This droving lasted for five centuries. The burgess grew rich as the knight dropped lower. The great merchants lived in mansions which could occupy whole blocks. The beds were surrounded by heavy draperies to keep out cold drafts. In towns these mansions were entered through a gate through a row of shops on the street. A lesser dwelling would have these rooms on three floors over a shop on the first floor. The humblest residents crowded their shop and family into one 6 by 10 foot room for rent of a few shillings a year. All except the last would also have a small garden. There were common and public privies for those without their own. Kitchen slops and casual refuse continued to be thrown into the street. Floors of stone or planks were strewn with rushes. There was some tile flooring. Most dwellings had glass windows. Candles were used for lighting at night. Furnishings were still sparse. Men sat on benches or joint stools and women sat on cushions on the floor. Hall and parlor had a table and benches and perhaps one chair. Better homes had wall hanging and cupboards displaying plate. Chimneys were introduced into manor houses where stone had been too expensive. Often a footman walked or ran on foot next to his master or mistress when they rode out on horseback or in a carriage. He was there primarily for prestige. Hands were washed before and after the meal. People washed their faces every morning after getting up. Teeth were cleaned with powders. Fragrant leaves were chewed for bad breath. Garlic was used for indigestion and other ailments. Feet were rubbed with salt and vinegar to remove calluses. Fishing and hunting were reserved for the nobility rather than just the King. An agricultural slump caused poorer soils to fall back into waste. They wore fine wool cloth in all their apparel. Brimless hats were replacing hoods. They had an abundance of bed coverings in their houses. And they had more free time. Playing games and gambling were popular pastimes. The Chancery court interpreted many of these documents to include rights of inheritance. The common law courts followed the lead of the Chancery and held that copyhold land could be inherited as was land at common law. Evictions by lords decreased. A class of laborers was arising who depended entirely on the wages of industry for their subsistence. This deepened the cleavage of the classes in the towns. Meat and poultry were plentiful and grain prices low. The distance between baron and a country knight and between a yeoman and knight was wider. Manor custom was strong. But law was growing as a profession. Many borough burgesses in Parliament were attorneys. A rear storeroom held more cloth for import or export. Many shops of skinners were on Fur Row. There was no sharp distinction between retail and wholesale trading. Breadcarts sold penny wheat loaves. Beam for weighing wool to be exported. The Mercers and Goldsmiths were in the prosperous part of town. The grain market was on Cornhill. The barbers kept their shops open in defiance of the church. Merchant guilds which imported or exported each had their own wharves and warehouses. Celcius lower caused the Thames to regularly freeze over in winter. The large scale of London trade promoted the specialization of the manufacturer versus the merchant versus the shipper. Merchants had enough wealth to make loans to the government or for new commercial enterprises. Some London merchants were knighted by the King. Many bought country estates and turned themselves into gentry. London and in the adjacent waters of the Thames River and all the profits and rents to be derived therefrom. London is a corporation by prescription. Many boroughs sought and obtained formal incorporation with the same essential features as London. This tied up the loose language of their early charters of liberties. A wealthy borough would have a chaplain and two or three minstrels. The mayor replaced the bailiffs as the chief magistracy. Scot was a rateable proportion in the payments levied from the town for local or national purposes. London trade of twenty men had its own guild. The guild secured good work for its members and the members maintained the reputation of the work standards of the guild. Bad work was punished and night work prohibited as leading to bad work. The guild exercised moral control over its members and provided sickness and death benefits for them. Apprentices were taken in to assure an adequate supply of competent workers for the future. When these apprentices had enough training they were made journeymen with a higher rate of pay. Journeymen traveled to see the work of their craft in other towns. Those journeymen rising to master had the highest pay rate. It was possible for wives to be free burgesses in their own right in some towns. Some ladies were patrons of writers. Their treatment was usually by scourging the demons out of their body by flogging. The guilds were being replaced by associations for the investment of capital. Competition among associations was starting to supplant custom as the mainspring of trade. Merchant Adventurers of London. The Merchant Adventurers was chartered in 1407. It was the first and a prototype of regulated companies. That is the company regulated the trade. Strict rules governed the conduct of each member. He was to make sales only at certain hours on specified days. A share in the ownership of one of their vessels was a common form of investment by prosperous merchants. They began to replace trade by alien traders. It eventually replaced the staples system. Paved roads in towns were usually gravel and sometimes cobble. They were frequently muddy because of rain and spillage of water being carried. London was the first town with paviors. The paviors were organized as a city company in 1479. The residents were to light these candle lanterns in winter from dusk to the 9 pm curfew. In 1480 the city walls were rebuilt with a weekly tax of 5d. Greek and rebirth of the Greek pursuit of the truth and scientific spirit of inquiry. There was a striking increase in the number of schools founded by wealthy merchants or town guilds. Sometimes girls were sent to live in another house to take advantage to receive education from a tutor there under the supervision of the lady of the house. King James I of Scotland wrote a book about how he fell in love. Fables were widely read. Arthurian stories was popular. Margery Kempe wrote the first true autobiography. Mary could have some cherries from it. Londoners could read English. God and as a work of charity. It was a wood and iron frame with a mounted platform on which were placed small metal frames into which words with small letters of lead had been set up. Each line of text had to be carried from the type case to the press. Beside the press were pots filled with ink and inking balls. Then a sheet of paper would be placed on the form and a lever pulled to press the paper against the type. Linen usually replaced the more expensive parchment for the book pages. The printing press made books more accessible to all literate people. Caxton printed major English texts and some translations from French and Latin. There were many cook books in use. The first public library in London was established from a bequest in a will in 1423. Many carols were sung at the Christian festival of Christmas. The legend of Robin Hood was popular. Town miracle plays on leading incidents of the Bible and morality plays were popular. Vintners portrayed the miracle of Cana where water was turned into wine and Goldsmiths ornately dressed the three Kings coming from the east. Ark was performed by the Shipwrights and the Flood performed by the Fishery and Mariners. Games of cards became popular as soon as cards were introduced. Christmas was celebrated with masques and mummings. May Day was celebrated with crowns and garlands of spring flowers. The village May Day pageant was often presided over by Robin Hood and Maid Marion. People turned to mysticism to escape from the everyday violent world. The austerity of their diet had vanished. The schedule of divine services was no longer followed by many and the fostering of learning was abandoned. Into monasteries drifted the lazy and miserable. Nunneries had become aristocratic boarding houses. Many families had kinsmen in the clergy. Even the lowest cleric or clerk could read and write in Latin. This increased the sense of punctuality and highered standards of efficiency. A linguistic unity and national pride was developing. London English became the norm and predominated over rural dialects. Important news was announced and spread by word of mouth in market squares and sometimes in churches. Peddling was fairly profitable because of the lack of competition. But pedlars were often viewed as tramps and suspected of engaging in robbery as well as peddling. A royal post service was established by relays of mounted messengers. The inland roads from town to town were still rough and without signs. A horseman could make up to 40 miles a day. Common carriers took passengers and parcels from various towns to London on scheduled journeys. Trade with London was so great and the common carrier so efficient in transporting goods that the medieval fair began to decline. First the Grocers and then the Mercers refused to allow their members to sell goods at fairs. There was much highway robbery. Embroidery was exported. Imports were restricted by national policy for the purpose of protecting native industries. The astrolabe was used for navigation by the stars. Consuls were appointed to assist English traders abroad. Henry IV appointed the first admiral of the entire nation and resolved to create a national fleet of warships instead of using merchant ships. Portsmouth was fortified as a naval base. Henry V issued the orders that formed the basic law of English admiralty and appointed surgeons to the navy and army. He was the last true warrior King. Parliament to the king for life for upkeep of the Navy. Epidemics broke out occasionally in the towns in the summers. Infirmaries were supported by a tax of the king levied on nearby counties. Those who benefited from these waterways were taxed for the repairs in proportion to their use thereof. Few townsmen choose to face death alone and planned memorial masses to be sung to lift his soul beyond Purgatory. Chantries were built by wealthy men for this purpose. King Henry IV in 1404. The Commons acquired the right to elect its own speaker. The lords who helped the usurpation felt they should share the natural power of the kingship. The council became the instrument of the Lords. Commons gained power compared to the nobility because many nobles had died in war. The consent of the Commons to legislation became so usual that the justices declared that it was necessary. The Commons began to see itself as representative of the entire commons of the realm instead of just their own counties. Lords had agreed to the money grant. It tied its grants by rule rather than just practice to certain appropriations. Each house had a right to deliberate in privacy. Any member of Parliament or either house or the king could initiate a bill. Both houses had the power to amend or reject a bill. There were conferences between select committees of both houses to settle their differences. Parliament and to be paid salaries. A quorum was fixed and rules made for removal from the council. Parliament was affected by the factionalism of the times. The speaker of the commons was often an officer of some great lord. Kings created dukes and marquesses to be peers. A duke was given creation money or allowance of 40 pounds a year. A marquess was given 35 pounds. It allowed them to be peers. There were about 55 peers. Many servants of the household of the country gentleman were poor relations. They might by education and accomplishment rise into the service of a baron who could take him to court and make his fortune. They were given wages and clothing allowances and had meals in the hall at tables according to their degree. Now the king used a signet kept by his secretary as his personal seal. The secretary was generally a member of the council. Tudor sovereigns later used. The rack stretched the supine body by the wrists and legs with increasing agony at the joints until the limbs were dislocated. King Richard III prohibited the seizure of goods before conviction of felony. He also liberated the unfree villeins on royal estates. The forcible entry statute is expanded to include peaceful entry with forcible holding after the justices arrived and to forcible holding with departure before the justices arrived. A forceful possession lasting three years is exempt. Women of age fourteen or over shall have livery of their lands and tenements by inheritance without question or difficulty. No one may keep swans unless he has lands and tenements of the estate of freehold to a yearly value of 67s. Any servant of agriculture who is serving a term with a master and covenants to serve another man at the end of this term and that other man shall notify the master by the middle of his term so he can get a replacement worker. No laborer may be hired by the week. Esquires and gentlemen with possessions to the value of 800s. Esquires and gentlemen with possessions to the yearly value of 800s. Men with possessions of the yearly value of 40s. Men with possessions under the yearly value of 40s. Shoes may not have pikes over two inches. Every town shall have at its cost a common balance with weights according to the standard of the Exchequer. All citizens may weigh goods for free. All cloth to be sold shall be sealed according to this measure. There is a standard bushel of grain throughout the nation. No gold or silver may be taken out of the nation. The price of silver is fixed at 30s. A designee of the king will inspect and seal cloth with lead to prevent deceit. Cloth may not be tacked together before inspection. No cloth may be sold until sealed. Tanners who make a notorious default in leather which is found by a cordwainer shall make a forfeiture. Defective embroidery for sale shall be forfeited. One half this forfeiture goes to the king and the other half to the person seizing the wares. Magna Carta includes women. The election of a knight from a county to go to Parliament shall be proclaimed by the sheriff in the full county so all may attend and none shall be commanded to do something else at that time. Election is to be by majority of the votes and its results will be sealed and sent to Parliament. Electors and electees to Parliament must reside in the county or be citizens or burgesses of a borough. Most former electors and every leaseholder and every copyholder were now excluded. Those elected for Parliament were still gentry chosen by substantial freeholders. London ordinances forbade placing rubbish or dung in the Thames River or any town ditch or casting water or anything else out of a window. The roads were maintained with tolls on carts and horses bringing victuals or grains into the city and on merchandise unloaded from ships at the port. No carter shall drive his cart more quickly when it is unloaded than when it is loaded. Desertion by a soldier is penalized by forfeiture of all land and property. The common law held that a bailee is entitled to possession against all persons except the owner of the bailed property. There are legal maxims and customs of ancient origin which have become well established and known though not written down as statutes. Some delineated by Christopher St. The spouse of a deceased person takes all personal and real chattels of the deceased. Land may never ascend from a son to his father or mother. No property may be had of them unless they are tame. If a man steals goods to the value of 12d. If it is under the value of 12d. A man declared outlaw forfeits his profits from land and his goods to the King. Such peremptory challenge shall not be admitted in a private suit. An accessory shall not be put to answer before the principal. The prohibition against maintenance was given penalties in 1406 of 100s. A person who brought such suit to court was to be given half the penalty. Bench were authorized to inquire about such practices. A penalty of one year in prison without bail was given. Still this law was seldom obeyed. This system of using land had been created by the friars to get around the prohibition against holding property. Lords and gentry quickly adopted it. Crown went to someone he had not supported. Chancery gave a remedy for dishonest or defaulting feofees. Chancery ordered accounts to be made in matters of foreign trade because the common law courts were limited to accounts pursuant to transactions made within the nation. It also involved itself in the administration of assets and accounting of partners to each other. He did not trust the reliance on friends of the defendant swearing that his statement made in his defense was true. An important evidentiary difference between procedures of the Chancery and the common law courts was that the Chancellor could orally question the plaintiff and the defendant under oath. Chancery often enjoined certain action. Chancery identified such suits and issued injunctions against taking them to any court. The Chancery was given jurisdiction by statute over men of great power taking by force women who had lands and tenements or goods and not setting them free unless they bound themselves to pay great sums to the offenders or to marry them. Justices certified the case to the King. Justices of the peace were not paid. These attorneys shall be sworn to serve well and truly in their offices. Attorneys may plead on behalf of parties in the hundred courts. In a plea of land worth at least 40s. So it became possible for a defendant to challenge an indictor for cause before the indictor was put on the petty assize. Then the petty assize came to be drawn from the country at large and was a true petty or trial jury. Jurors were separated from witnesses. Justices of the Peace were to have lands worth 267s. Justices of the Peace of the county. He had to reside in his bailiwick. Impeachment was replaced with bill of attainder during the swift succession of parliaments during the civil war. This was a more rapid and efficient technique of bringing down unpopular ministers or political foes. Thomas Russell and Alice his wife brought a writ of trespass for goods taken from Alice while she was single. Chancellor if he disobeys. We have consulted together on this matter among ourselves and we see no harm which can come to the plaintiff if he proceeds to judgment. The law will not make him pay the penalty provided in the injunction. Fairfax said he would go to the Chancellor and ask him if he would discharge the injunction. An example of a petition to chancery in the 15th century is Hulkere v. Harry Alcote and Elizabeth of the foresaid Gildenburton within the same county of Northampton. Of the which false release proved she has a copy to show. John Devenshire of Berdevyle in Essex and James Kelom of London. Returnable in Michaelmas term. War of the Roses between the Lancaster and York factions. Henry VII restored order to the nation. He was readily accepted as king because he was descended from the Lancaster royal line and he married a woman from the York royal line. Henry was intelligent and sensitive. He weighed alternatives and possible consequences before taking action. He was convinced by reason on what plans to make. It had no jury and no grand jury indictment. Henry applied himself diligently to the details of the work of government to make it work well. Rural juries were intimidated by the old baronage and their armed retinues. Juries in municipal courts were subverted by gangs of townsmen. The agricultural work of the nation had been adversely affected. Henry made policy with the advice of his council and had Parliament enact it into legislation. He dominated Parliament by having selected most of its members. Many of his council were sons of burgesses and had been trained in universities. He chose competent and especially trusted men for his officers and commanders of castles and garrison. The fact that only the king had artillery deterred barons from revolting. The higher nobility now consisted of about twenty families. The ties between the nobility and the Justices of the Peace had encouraged corruption of justice. So Henry appointed many of the lesser gentry and attorneys as Justices of the Peace. Justices of the Peace. There were a total of about thirty Justices of the Peace per county. Their appointments were indefinite and most remained until retirement or death. Henry instituted the Yeomen of the Guard to be his personal bodyguards night and day. Many bills of attainder caused lords to lose their land to the King. Most of these lords had been chronic disturbers of the peace. Henry was also known to exhaust the resources of barons he suspected of disloyalty by accepting their hospitality for himself and his household for an extended period of time. He regularly ordered all men with an income of 800s. Crown became rich and therefore powerful. Her active beneficence was a counteracting influence to his avaricious predisposition. Henry paid for an intelligent boy he met to go to school. Henry had the first paper mill erected in the nation. He had his own library and gave books to other libraries. The age of entry to university was between 13 and 16. Inns of Court in London. The Inns of Court attracted the sons of gentry and merchants pursuing practical and social accomplishments. Often this was land that had been under the plough. Any villeins were given their freedom and they and the tenants at will were thrown off it immediately. Only freeholders and copyholders with the custom of the manor in their favor were secure against eviction. On the other extreme was the agricultural laborer working for wages. Henry made several proclamations ordering certain enclosures to be destroyed and tillage to be restored. Other land put to use for sheep breeding was waste land. There were three sheep to every person. The nearby woodlands no longer had wolves or lynx who could kill the sheep. Bears and elk are also gone. Most people lived and died where they had been born. The life of the village still revolved around the church. Wills often left property or rents from leased land to the church. Cows and sheep given could be leased out to villagers. The principal streets of the larger towns were paved with gravel. Guild halls became important and imposing architecturally. A large area of London was taken up by walled gardens of the monasteries and large mansions. There were some houses of stone and timber and some mansions of brick and timber clustered around palaces. Bedspreads were introduced. Fireplaces became usual in all the rooms. Tapestries covered the walls. Carpets were used in the private rooms. Some of the great halls had tiled floors. The old trestle tables were replaced by tables with legs. Benches and stools had backs to lean on. Women and men wore elaborate headdresses. On the outer periphery are mud and straw taverns and brothels. Houses are beginning to be built outside the walls along the Thames because the collapse of the power of the great feudal lords decreased the fear of an armed attack on London. City and have more light and space. Indeed no baronial army ever threatened the king again. There was a drawbridge on the south part of London Bridge for defense and to let ships through. Water sports were played on the Thames such as tilting at each other with lances from different boats. These yeomen had their own fraternities and were often on strike. London suburbs outside the jurisdiction of their craft to search them. Membership could be bought for a large fee or gained by apprenticeship or by being the son of a member. Foreign trade was revived because it was a period of comparative peace. Ships weighed 200 tons and had twice the cargo space they had previously. Their bows were more pointed and their high prows made them better able to withstand gales. The scale gave precision to directions. Ships had three masts. On the first was a square sail. On the second was a square sail with a small rectangular sail above it. On the third was a three cornered lateen sail. These sails make it possible to sail in almost any direction. This opened the seas of the world to navigation. At this time navigators kept their knowledge and expertise secret from others. Sailors overcame their fear of tumbling into one of the openings into hell that they believed were far out into the Atlantic Ocean and ceased to believe that a red sunset in the morning was due to a reflection from hell. Seamen could venture forth into the darkness of the broad Atlantic Ocean with a fair expectation of finding their way home again. They gradually learned that there were no sea serpents or monsters that would devour foolhardy mariners. But there were still mutinies and disobedient pilots. Mortality rates among seamen were high. Theologians had to admit that Jerusalem was not the center of the world. The blast furnace was introduced in the iron industry. A blast of hot air was constantly forced from a stove into the lower part of the furnace which was heating at high temperature a mixture of the iron ore and a reducing agent that combined with the oxygen released. Blast furnace heat was maintained by bellows worked by water wheels. Alchemists sought to make gold from the baser metals and to make a substance that would give them immortality. Card games were introduced. The legend of Robin Hood was written down. An heir in ward shall have an action of waste against his lord as if his ancestor had died seised of the land. Any person without a forest of his own who has a net device with which to catch deer shall pay 200s. Anyone stalking a deer with beasts anywhere not in his own forest shall forfeit 200s. Anyone taking any heron by device other than a hawk or long bow shall forfeit 6s. No one shall take a young heron from its nest or pay 10s. No currier shall curry hides which have not been tanned. No tanner shall sell other than red leather. No tanner may sell a hide before it is dried. No tanner may tan sheepskins. No long bow shall be sold over the price of 3s. Good wood for making bows may be imported without paying customs. No grained cloth of the finest making shall be sold for more than 16s. No hat shall be sold for more than 20d. Salmon shall be sold by standard volume butts and barrels. Herring shall be sold at standard volumes. The fish shall be packed in the manner prescribed or forfeit for each vessel 3s. Anyone using false weights of such wares shall forfeit 20s. This is to stop losing horses needed for defense of the nation and to stop the price of a horse from going up. London ordinance to the contrary. Merchants residing in the nation but outside London shall have free access to foreign markets without exaction taken of more than 133s. London for less than they would get at a foreign market. Exacting more is punishable by a fine of 400s. The penalty was later changed to one half thereof. Bench shall constitute the court of the Star Chamber. For every inquiry made upon viewing a slain body coroners shall be paid 13s. King or the Chancellor. There shall then be inquiry into why the other justices did not remedy the situation. Bench and Common Pleas as actions of trespass or debt. These may sue within five years of losing such condition. A defendant who appeals a decision for the purpose of delaying execution of such shall pay costs and damages to the plaintiff for the delay. And no more complaints than the complaining party knows about shall be entered. This is to prevent extortion of defendants by false complaints. A bailiff of a hundred who does not do his duty to summon defendants shall pay a fine of 40s. Justice of the Peace to examine for deceit. Petite treason was that by a wife to her husband or a man to his lord. Any person not responding to a summons for jury service shall be fined 12d. A pauper may sue in any court and be assigned a attorney at no cost to him. Such hunting in disguise or hunting at night or disobeying such warrant is a felony. This begins the gradual restriction of benefit of clergy until it disappears. Any person proved to be a maintainer or embracer shall forfeit 400s. The principal leaders of any riot or unlawful assembly shall be imprisoned and fined and be bound to the peace with sureties at a sum determined by the Justices of the Peace. Justices of Peace shall certify such and send the record of conviction to the King. And the receivers shall have the same advantages and defenses as the feoffees or as if they were tenants. And debts and executions of judgments may be had upon the land and tenements. The penalty for not paying customs is double the value of the goods. The town of London shall have jurisdiction over flooding and unlawful fishing nets in that part of the Thames River that flows next to it. Other changes in the judicial process were made by court decision. Chancery became an independent court rather than the arm of the king and his council. Evidence is now taken from witnesses. Various courts had overlapping jurisdiction. Court of Common Pleas because it was a civil action between two private persons. Court in London had nine offenders a week by 1500. Punishment was penance by walking barefoot before the cross in the Sunday Procession dressed in a sheet and holding a candle. Renaissance humanism came into being in the nation. Platonism and the study of Greek literature as the means of better understanding and writing. There had long been displeasure with the priests of the church. But there were many lapses. Probate fees had risen from at most 5s. People objected to the right of arrest by ecclesiastical authorities. No one other than a laborer was illiterate in the towns. London by merchants and guilds. The usual age of entry was six or seven. Classical Latin and Greek were taught and the literature of the best classical authors was read. The method of teaching was for the teacher to read textbooks to the class from a prepared curriculum. The students were taught in Latin and expected not to speak English in school. They had horn books with the alphabet and perhaps a Biblical verse on them. This was a piece of wood with a paper on it held down by a sheet of transparent horn. Disobedience incurred flogging by teacher as well as by parents. Spare the rod and spoil the child was the philosophy. Schools now guarded the morals and behavior of students. There were two week vacations at Christmas and at Easter. Royal grammar books for English and Latin were proclaimed by Henry in 1543 to be the only grammar book authorized for students. English to be the only one to be used by students. The first school of humanist studies arose in Oxford with the Foundation of Corpus Christi College in 1516 by Bishop Richard Fox. It had the first permanent Reader or Professor in Greek. The third Reader of Theology was to read texts of the Holy Fathers but not those of their commentators. Oxford University was granted a charter which put the greater part of the town under control of the Chancellor and scholars. The mayor of Oxford was required to take an oath at his election to maintain the privileges and customs of the university. Roman law and other Regius professorships were founded by the king at Oxford and Cambridge. This exposure to foreign fields was no longer readily available through war or pilgrimage. The physicians of London were incorporated to oversee and govern the practice of medicine. A faculty of physicians was established at Oxford and Cambridge. The College of Physicians taught more practical medicine and anatomy than the universities. Only graduates of the College of Physicians or of Oxford or Cambridge were allowed to practice medicine or surgery. Medical texts were Hippocrates and Galen. These viewed disease as only part of the process of nature without anything divine. Hippocrates had asserted that madness was simply a disease of the brain and then Galen had agreed and advocated merciful treatment of the insane. He taught the importance of a good water supply and good drainage. In 1540 began the practice of giving bodies of hanged felons to surgeons to dissect. This was to deter the commission of felony. Eve having been made from a rib of the man Adam. This began a new way to disseminate new methods in agriculture. Gemma Frisius laid down the principles of topographical survey by triangulation. This improved the quality of surveys and produced accurate plots. The North and South American continents were named for him. London merchant guilds began to be identified mainly with hospitality and benevolence instead of being trading organizations. Twelve great companies dominated city politics and effectively chose the mayor and aldermen. The leading men of these guilds were generally aldermen and the guilds acted like municipal committees of trade and manufactures. Then they superintended the trade and manufactures of London much like a government department. They generally had a right to a place at the Company banquets. These liverymen were usually those who had bought membership and paid higher fees because they were richer. Their pensions were larger than those of mere members. Those with mere membership were freemen who had only the simple freedom of the trade. The masters were usually householders. Goldsmiths had been blinded by the fire and smoke of quicksilver and some members had been rendered crazed and infirm by working in that trade. The freedom and rights of citizenship of the city could only be obtained through membership in a livery company. Londoners went to the fields outside the city for recreation and games. Many English migrated to London. There was much social mobility. London grew in population about twice as fast as the nation. Some had to sell their manors and dismiss their servants. There are 26 wards of London as of 1550. This is the number for the next four centuries. This contributed greatly to social stability. Henry ordered the London brothels closed. In the summer they had to work for two hours longer for 8d. Henry issued a proclamation ordering noblemen and gentlemen in London not employed by the court to return to their country homes to perform their service to the king. The humanist Thomas More was a university trained intellectual. But otherwise people choose their religious beliefs and their priests. He encouraged a religious revival. More believed the new humanistic studies should be brought to women as well as to men. Other high class women became highly educated. They voiced their opinions on religious matters. She and the countess of Sussex supported ministers and established seminaries for the spread of the reformed faith. More pled for proportion between punishment and crime. He urged that theft no longer be punished by death because this only encouraged the thief to murder his victim to eliminate evidence of the theft. He opined that the purpose of punishment was to reform offenders. He advocated justice for the poor to the standard of justice received by the rich. Childhood and senility are the most pleasant stages of life because ignorance is bliss. Old age forgetfulness washes away the cares of the mind. The least unhappy are those who approximate the naiveness of the beasts and who never attempt what is beyond men. Fools are free from the fear of death and from the pangs of conscience. They are not filled with vain worries and hopes. They are not troubled by the thousand cares to which this life is subject. The life of Christians is run over with nonsense. They do this with such brazen skill that our attorneys are often jealous of them. Attorney Christopher St. It is good to be loved. Evil is to be avoided. Do onto others as you would have them do unto you. Do nothing against the truth. Live peacefully with others. Justice is to be done to every man. No one is to wrong another. A trespasser should be punished. From these is deduced that a man should love his benefactor. It is lawful to put away force with force. It is lawful for every man to defend himself and his goods against an unlawful power. Henry VIII dominated Parliament. His purported reason was to have a son. This nature allowed him to declare himself the head of the church of England instead of the pope. Henry used and then discarded officers of state e. But he was brilliant and more of a strategist than Henry. Wolsey rose to be Chancellor to the King and Archbishop of York. He was second only to the King and he strengthened the crown by consolidating power and income that had been scattered among nobles and officeholders. He also came to control the many courts. Oxford and his home town. He was an impartial and respected justice. Thomas Cromwell Chancellor. He drafted and had passed legislation that created a new church of England. He had all men swear an oath to the terms of the succession statute. Thomas More was known for his honesty and was a highly respected man. But silence did not save him. He was attainted for treason on specious grounds and beheaded. More as saying that Parliament did not have the power to require assent to the supremacy statute because it was repugnant to the common law of Christendom. Henry ruled with an iron fist. Henry had Parliament pass bills of attainder against many people. Cromwell heard what men said to their closest friends. Words idly spoken were distorted into treasonable utterances. Fear spread through the people. Cromwell developed a technique for the management of the House of Commons which lasted for generations. A reformed English Bible was put in all parish churches. Reformers were licensed to preach. Cromwell ordered sermons to be said which proclaimed the supremacy of the King. He dissolved all the lesser monasteries. It met daily instead of just during the terms of the Westminster courts from late autumn to early summer. English Common Book of Prayer. English instead of Latin. Supper was a communion among the parishoners and minister all sharing the wine and bread. This reflected the blood sacrifice of Christ dying on the cross. London then set up a poor relief scheme. Parishes were required to give money for the poor in 1563. Henry used the proceeds from the sale of the monasteries for building many new palaces and wood ships for his navy. Title deeds became important as attorneys sought the security that title could give. They bought the raw wool and hired craftsmen for every step of the manufacturing process to be done in one continuous process. This was faster than buying and selling the wool material between craftsmen who lived in different areas. Many landowners now could live in towns exclusively off the rents of their rural land. Rents were increased so much that tenants could not pay and were evicted. They usually became beggars or thieves. Much of their former land was converted from crop raising to pasture for large herds of sheep. There were exceptional profits made from the export of wool cloth. But much raw wool was still exported. Its price went up from 6s. Villeinage was now virtually extinct. There was steady inflation. Landlords made their leases short term so that they could raise rents as prices rose. Rich traders built town or country houses in which the emphasis was on comfort and privacy. Some floors were tiled instead of stone or wood. They were still strewn with straw. The owners ate in a private dining room and slept in their own rooms with down quilts. Men wore long tunics open at the neck and filled in with pleated linen and enormous puffed sleeves. Henry also made a proclamation limiting the consumption of certain meat according to status. They had bedcovers on their beds. Cloth bore the mark of its weaver and came in many colors. Cloth could be held together with pins that had a shank with a hook by which they were closed. People went to barbers to cut their hair and to extract teeth. They bought potions and medicines from apothecaries and pharmacists. They burned wood logs in the fireplaces in their houses. So much wood was used that young trees were required by statute to be given enough lateral space to spread their limbs and were not cut down until mature. Each slept with his purse under his pillow. Some townswomen were independent traders. London with more water. The sewers carried only surface water away. Households were forbidden to use the sewers. Privies emptied into cesspools. Fellowship brought virtually all adventurers under its control and organized and regulated the national cloth trade. These were regulated companies. The companies generally confined trade to men who were primarily merchants and not shopkeepers. It was oriented primarily to export English woolen cloth. The risks were too great for any few individuals. It hired ships and assigned space to each member to ship his goods at his own risk. The dividend was return to the subscribers of the capital put in plus an appropriate share of any profits made on the voyage. The members began leaving their money with the company for the next voyage. A general stock grew up. Mineral and Battery Works. The forge hammers were worked at first by levers and later by water wheels. The day and night hammering filled the neighborhood with their noise. Land held in common was partitioned. There were dairies making butter and cheese. Citizens paid taxes to the king amounting to one tenth of their annual income from land or wages. All people generally had enough food because of the commercialization of agriculture. Goods were also transported by the pulling of barges on the rivers from paths along the river. A plough with wheels was used as well as those without. The Book of Martyrs taught the duty and splendor of rising above all physical danger or suffering. The canon law of the church was abolished and its study prohibited. Professorships of the civil law were founded at the two universities. The Inns of Court grew. Attorneys had more work with the new laws passed to replace the church canons of the church. They played an important role in town government and many became wealthy. They acquired town houses in addition to their rural estates. Church reforms included abolishing church sanctuaries. Benefit of clergy was restricted. Parsons were allowed to marry. Archbishops were selected by the king without involvement by the pope. Court of Chancery instead of to the pope. Parliament if the country were threatened with invasion. About 1550 there began indictments and executions for witchcraftery which lasted for about a century. He urged that wounds be kept clean rather than given poultices. He perceived that syphillis was caused by contagion and used mercury to cure it. Opium was made by drying and cooking the capsule of the poppy and was one of the few really effective early drugs. Paracelsus urged alchemists to try to prepare drugs from minerals for the relief of suffering. He claimed to acquire knowledge of cures through spiritual contacts to occult wisdom. He believed that a human being has an invisible body as well as a visible one and that it is closely attuned to imagination and the spiritual aspect of an individual. He saw insanity as illness instead of possession by evil spirits. Understanding of the celestial world began to change. The universe was finite. First came the circle of the moon. The sun orbited the earth. The fixed stars rotated on an outer firmament. God and his heavenly hosts. Astrologers read the celestial signs and messages. He regarded it as more likely that the earth rotated than that the stars moved with great speed in their large orbits. The church considered his ideas heretical because contradictory to its dogma that man and the earth were the center of the universe. A central sun evoked images of pagan practices of sun worship. A person having land in socage or fee simple may will and devise his land by will or testament in writing. The lessor shall have a remedy for rents due or waste by a termer after recovering the land as well as if he had not recovered the land. This was difficult to enforce. If the land is worth less than 40s. If the land exceeds 40s. No bishop or other official having authority to take probate of testaments may take a fee for probating a testament where the goods of the testator are under 100s. Where the goods are over 100s. Where the goods are over 800s. The official shall approve and seal the testament without delay and deliver it to the executors named in such testaments for the said sum. No parish clergyman or other spiritual person shall take a mortuary fee or money from a deceased person with movable goods under the value of 133s. Only one mortuary fee may be taken of each deceased and that in the place where he most dwelled and lived. Where such goods are 600s. Where such goods are 800s. He shall abjure and bear a faggot if he does not recant or offends a second time. He shall forfeit his goods and suffer perpetual imprisonment if he does not abjure or bear a faggot or offends a third time. The entry of an apprentice into a craft shall not cost more than 2s. This replaced the various fees ranging from this to 40s. No master of a craft may require his apprentice to make an oath not to compete with him by setting up a shop after the term of his apprenticeship. No alien may take up a craft or occupation in the nation. The price of beer barrels sold to ale or beer brewers or others shall be 9d. Tanned leather shall be sold only in open fairs and markets and after it is inspected and sealed. No one making cloth for sale may have more than one woolen loom or forfeit 20s. No one owning a fulling mill may own a weaving loom. No weaver may own a fulling mill. No one may hunt or kill hare in the snow since their killing in great numbers by men other than the king and noblemen has depleted them. No one may disguise himself with hidden or painted face to enter a forest or park enclosed with a wall for keeping deer to steal any deer or hare. But a freeholder of 40s. No butcher may kill any calf born in the spring. All persons shall kill crows on their land to prevent them from eating so much grain at sowing and ripening time and destroying hay stacks and the thatched roofs of houses and barns. They shall assemble yearly to survey all the land to decide how best to destroy all the young breed of crows for that year. Every village and town with at least ten households shall put up and maintain crow nets for the destruction of crows. No land used for raising crops may be converted to pasture. No woods may be converted to agriculture or pasture. The efforts to enforce these proved these prohibitions were not successful. No one shall cut down or break up dikes holding salt water and fresh water from flooding houses and pastures. Begging without a license is punishable by whipping or setting in the stocks 3 days with only bread and water. French wines may not sell at retail for more than 8d. A barrel maker or cooper may sell a beer barrel for 10d. A man may have only as many trotting horses for the saddle as are appropriate to his degree. Hemp of flax may not be watered in any river or stream where animals are watered. No one shall sell merchandise to another and then buy back the same merchandise within three months at a lower price. No one shall sell merchandise to be paid for in a year above the sum of 200s. No one shall sell or mortgage any land upon condition of payment of a sum of money before a certain date above the sum of 200s. No one shall libel by accusing another of treason in writing and leaving it in an open place without subscribing his own name to it. If any servant converts to his own use more than 40s. Killing by poisoning shall be deemed murder and is punishable by death. Buggery may not be committed on any person or beast. No one shall slander or libel the king by speeches or writing or printing or painting. The mayor of London shall appoint householders to supervise watermen rowing people across the Thames River because so many people have been robbed and drowned by these rowers. All such boats must be at least 23 feet long and 5 feet wide. No man shall take away or marry any maiden under 16 years of age with an inheritance against the will of her father. Any marriage solemnized in church and consummated shall be valid regardless of any prior agreement for marriage. No one shall sell any woolen cloth that shrinks when it is wet. For every 60 sheep there shall be kept one milk cow because of the scarcity of cattle. No weaver may have more than two wool looms. Every craftsman who has three apprentices shall have one journeyman. Servants in agriculture and bargemen shall serve by the whole year and not by day wages. There shall be a sales tax of 12d. Anyone fighting in church shall be excluded from the fellowship of the parish community. No one shall use a rope or device to stretch cloth for sale so to make it appear as more in quantity than it is. No one going from house to house to repair metal goods or sell small goods he is carrying may do this trade outside the town where he lives. Offenders may be put in the town or county gaol for three days. The Year Books ceased in 1535. Court of Common Pleas. Doctors of the civil law may practice in the church or Chancery courts. Piracy and murder on ships is punishable by death only after confession or proof by disinterested witnesses. Each justice of the high courts may employ one chaplain. Justices of the Peace were commanded to imprison clergy who taught papal authority. Justices of the Peace and sheriffs were to watch over the bishops. The Justices of Assize were to assess the effectiveness of the Justices of the Peace as well as enforce the treason statute on circuit. It adopted every analogy that the common law presented. Its procedure was to force the defendant to answer on oath the charges that were brought against him. All pleadings and usually testimony was put into writing. Much evidence consisted of written affidavits. The Chancery court did not record its decisions apparently because it did not see itself s bound by precedents. House of Commons served as fact finders. Greek was founded at Cambridge University. Learning from books was one of her highest values throughout her life. She was so influenced by her reading of Cicero that she acquired his style of writing. And this demonstration should be done with modesty. The first goal of a ruler is to take care that each individual is secured in the quiet enjoyment of his own property. The second goal is to impose taxes that are not burdensome. The third goal is to furnish the people with necessaries. The law should be enforced keeping in mind that its fundamental purpose is to keep up agreement and union among citizens. Elizabeth cared deeply for the welfare of all citizens of whatever class. She was sensitive to public opinion and was loved by her people. She claimed that she had never dishonored her tongue with a falsehood to anyone. She expected that any covert manipulations by monarchs would be found out and therefore would damage their credibility. England was a small Protestant nation threatened by the larger Catholic nations of France and Spain. Her credit reputation was so good that she could always get loans at small rates of interest from other countries. The Elizabethan era was one of general prosperity. Her good spirits and gayness created a happy mood in the nation. She loved dancing and madrigal music was popular. She came to dress elaborately and fancifully. Her skirt was held out with a petticoat with progressively larger hoops. There were two layers of skirt with the top one parted to show the bottom one. She wore decorated gloves. Married ladies curled their hair and wore it in high masses on their heads with jewels interwoven into it. At their leather belts they hung pouches and perhaps a watch. Men now wore stuffed breeches and stockings instead of long hosen. Some wore a jewelled and embroidered codpiece between their legs to emphasize their virility. Both gentlemen and ladies wore silk stockings and socks over them and then boots. Coats dipped in boiled linseed oil with resin served as raincoats. Other ladies then began wearing wigs. Elizabeth issued a proclamation reminding people of the apparel laws and reiterating certain provisions which had been disregarded. One had to be at least an earl to wear gold or silver or sable. Women spent much of their time doing needlework and embroidery. Children wore the same type of apparel as their elders. They were given milk at meals for good growth. It was recognized that sickness could be influenced by diet and herbs. Sickness was still viewed as an imperfect balance of the four humors. These people lived primarily on food from his own ground. There was a wave of building and renovation activity in town and country. Houses were designed symmetrically with decorative features instead of a haphazard addition of rooms. Windows were large and put on the outer walls instead of just inside the courtyard. A scarcity of timber caused proportionally more stone to be used for dwelling houses and proportionately more brick to be used for royal palaces and mansions. There were locks and bolts for protection from intruders. Richly carved screens separated the hall from the kitchen. Some private rooms may have carpets on the floor. Walls were smoothly plastered or had carved wood paneling to control drafts. Painted cloths replaced tapestries on walls. Iron stands with candles were hung from the ceiling and used on tables. Plastered ceilings and a lavish use of glass made rooms lighter and cozy. Sometimes there was a study room or breakfast room as well. Chests of drawers developed from a drawer at the bottom of a wardrobe. Great houses had a wardrobe chamber with a fireplace in front of which the yeoman of the wardrobe and his assistants could repair clothes and hangings. Bedrooms all led out of each other. But curtains on the four poster beds with tops provided privacy and warmth. The chamber pots and buckets were emptied into cesspits. A large set of lodgings had attached to it latrines consisting of a small cell in which a seat with a hole was placed over a shaft which connected to a pit or a drain. The servants slept in turrets or attics. Elizabeth had a room just for her bath. Each room had carved chairs and cabinets. Taking a meal in the great chamber involved the same ceremonial ritual as in the manorial great chamber dating from the 1400s. The table was covered with a linen cloth. Grace was said before the meal. The lady of the house sat in a chair at the upper end of the table and was served first. Fine clear Italian glass drinking vessels replaced even gold and silver goblets. They ate from silver dishes with silver spoons. Sugar was used to make sweet dishes. Toothpicks made of brass or silver or merely a stiff quill were used. Some might take a walk in the gardens. What was left was given to the poor at the gates of the house. Bible should be taken literally. The family included step children and married sons and daughters with their spouses. Young couples often lived with the parents of one of them. Chandeliers of candles lit rooms. There were sandglass clocks. Smoking tobacco from a clay pipe and taking snuff became popular with men. Clothes were washed in rivers and wells. Most dwellings were of brick and stone. Only a few were of wood or mud and straw. The average house was now four rooms instead of three. Yeomen might have six rooms. Farmers might have two instead of one room. Loom tapestry and painted cloth was hung to keep out the cold in their single story homes. The poor still used wooden plates and spoons. Laborers had canvas sheets. Kitchens were often separate buildings to reduce the risk of fire. Roasting was done on a spit and baking in irons boxes placed in the fire or in a brick oven at the side of the fireplace. Sometimes dogs were used to turn a spit by continual running in a treadmill. Some people lived in hovels due to the custom in many places that a person could live in a home he built on village waste land if he could build it in one night. Yeomen farmers still worked from dawn to dusk. This meant that many animals could be maintained throughout the winter instead of being slaughtered and salted. Gentlemen ate wheat bread. There was a scarcity of fruits and vegetables that adversely affected the health of the affluent as well as of the poor due to the overall decline in farming. The value of grain and meat rose compared to wool. Grain became six times its value in the previous reign. The necessity of manuring and the rotation of crops and grasses such as clover for enrichment of the soil were recognized. There was much appropriation of common land by individual owners by sale or force. Many farms were enclosed by fences or hedges so that each holder could be independent of his neighbors. A laborer could earn 6d. Unfree villeinage ceased on the royal estates. But most land was still farmed in common and worked in strips without enclosure. Elizabeth made several proclamations ordering the enclosure of certain enclosed land to be destroyed and the land returned to tillage. Windmills now had vanes replacing manual labor to change the position of the sails when the wind direction changed. Prosperous traders and farmers who owned their own land assumed local offices as established members of the community. The population of the nation was about five million. Life expectancy was about 40 years of age. Most of London was confined within the city wall. Flower gardens and nurseries came into existence. No part of the city was more than a ten minute walk to the fields. Some wealthy merchants had four story mansions or country houses outside the city walls. East of the Tower was a seafaring and industrial population. Row was replete with four story houses. The mayor of London was typically a rich merchant prince. People lived at the back or on the second floor of their shops. The pigs could still wander through the streets. By 1600 the greatest trading companies in London ceased to be associated only with their traditional goods and were dominated by merchants whose main interest was in the cloth trade. Ambitious merchants joined a livery company to become freemen of the city and for the status and social benefits of membership. They were intimately involved with the government of the city. Life in London was lived in the open air in the streets. The merchant transacted business agreements and the attorney saw his clients in the street or at certain pillars at St. Water carriers carried water in wood vessels on a shoulder from the Thames River or its conduits to the inhabitants three gallons at a time. Apprentices lived with their masters and worked from 6 or 7 a. Some people knitted wool caps as they walked to sell when finished. The guilds insured quality by inspecting goods for a fee. Merchant Adventurer Thomas Gresham established the Royal Exchange as a place for merchants and brokers to meet for business purposes. Its great bell rang at midday and at 6 p. Its courtyard was lined with shops that rented at 50s. Lee out of the country. But it did come into use. Frame knitting became a scattered industry. By 1600 basement services were frequently found in town houses built on restricted sites in London. There was virtually no drainage. A few cesspits were made air tight. Refuse was emptied out of front doors and shoveled into heaps on street corners. It was then dumped into the Thames or along the highways leading out of town. People put on perfume to avoid the stench. This provided a clean toilet area all year round. But these toilets were not much used because of sewer smells coming from them. The sky above London was darkened somewhat by the burning of coal in houses. Taverns served meals as well as ale. They were popular meeting places for both men and women of all backgrounds to met their friends. Men went to taverns for camaraderie and to conduct business. Women usually went to taverns with each other. Two taverns in particular were popular with the intelligentsia. Music was usually played in the background and games were sometimes played. Beer made with hops and malt was introduced and soon there were beer drinking contests. Drunkenness became a problem. The constable and his watchmen carried lanterns and patrolled the streets asking anyone they saw why they were out so late at night. Crime was rampant in the streets and criminals were executed near to the crime scene. The main thoroughfare in London was still the Thames River. Thames had their own boats and landings. Swans swam in the clear bright water. Watermen rowed people across the Thames for a fee. In 1550 Southwark became the 26th and last ward of the city. Mayor and aldermen made contracts with merchants concerning their wares. Some contracts included holding wares as security. The problem was that many of the items pawned had been stolen. It banned the eating of meat two days a week so that the fishing industry and port towns would prosper. There were labor strikes in some towns for higher wages after periods of inflation. London authorities rounded up the sturdy vagabonds and set them to work cleaning out the city ditches for 4d. Court back to their country manors to take care of and feed the poor of their parishes. She never issued a license for more than 100 retainers. She was partially successful in stopping justices of the peace and sheriffs from wearing the liveries of great men. She continued the policy of Henry VII to replace the rule of force by the rule of law. Service of the crown and influence at court became a better route to power and fortune than individual factions based on local power structures. Many wives and daughters of Privy Councilors attended the Queen in her privy chamber. Most of the knights or gentlemen of the royal household were also members of Parliament or Justices of the Peace for certain districts in the counties. She ate her meals in the privy chamber attended only by her ladies. She believed that a light supper was conducive to good health. Lord Treasurer to the cooks and grooms of the stable. Elizabeth took her entire court on summer visits to the country houses of leading nobility and gentry. The authority of the Queen was the authority of the state. She never blamed those who did their best and never discharged anyone form office except for cause. She never credited a tale that was first told to her and never corrupted her judgment with a censure before she had heard the cause. She did not think that the glory of the title of monarch made all she did lawful. The children of the gentry were usually taught in their homes by private teachers of small classes. Many of the poor became literate enough to read the Bible and to write letters. Christian cross and signified its solemnity. Children of the poor were expected to work from the age of 6 or 7. Latin and Greek grammar. English grammar was learned through Latin grammar and English style through translation from Latin. English in a latin style. Literary criticism was learned through rhetoric. The students sat in groups around the hall for their lessons. There were no playgrounds. The middle classes from the squire to the petty tradesman were brought into contact with the works of the best Greek and Roman writers. Erasmus and Sir Thomas More. There were so many grammar schools founded and financed by merchants and guilds such as the Mercers and Fishmongers that every incorporated town had at least one. Flogging with a birch rod was used for discipline. The girls did not usually stay beyond the age of nine. Oxford University and Cambridge University were incorporated to have a perpetual existence for the virtuous education of youth and maintenance of good literature. Oxford was authorized to and did acquire its own printing press. Undergraduate students entered about age 16 and resided in rooms in colleges rather than in scattered lodgings. The graduate fellows of the college who were M. But they were still required to resign on marrying or taking up an ecclesiastical benefice. It was through the tutors that modern studies fit for the education of a Renaissance gentleman became the norm. Students had text books to read rather than simply listening to a teacher read books to them. In addition to the lecturing of the M. Final examinations were still by disputation. The students came to learn to read Latin easily. Students acted in Latin plays. Fines for absence from class were imposed. Meals were taken together in the college halls. Undergraduate education was considered to be for the purpose of good living as well as good learning. The emphasis on manners came mostly from an Italian influence. The university curriculum included Latin and Greek languages and was for four years. There were no courses on English history in the universities. Pythagorean theorem related the three sides of a right triangle. Inns of Court in London. Students were called to dinner by a horn. Only young gentry were admitted there. Justice of the Peace in his home county. Many later became justices of the Peace or members of Parliament. There was a real bar of iron or wood separating the justices from the attorneys and litigants. College of Physicians. Readers gave lectures. Justices were chosen from the Serjeants at Law. They were installed in 1598 according to his Will. They embraced mathematics and new scientific ideas and emphasized their practical applications. A tradition of research and teaching was established in mathematics and astronomy. Many people kept diaries. Letter writing was frequent at court. Many ladies read aloud to each other in reading circles and to their households. Some wrote poetry and did translations. Correctness of spelling was beginning to be developed. Printers tended to standardize it. In them he commented on many subjects from marriage to faction. He urged the use of words with their correct meaning. English fiction began and was read. There were some books for children. At the lowest level of literacy were ballads. Printed broadsheets on political issues could be distributed quickly. Books were also censored for matter against the state church. It could burn other books and imprison their printers. So shall no part of your accompt in any wise decay. Take heed of using a false balance or measure. The old prohibitions of the now declining canon law were still observed. The printing press had made possible the methodizing of knowledge and its dissemination to a lay public. The sharing of knowledge was to benefit the community at large. They were enjoyed by all classes of people. His histories were especially popular. The audience applauded and hissed. Ordinary admission was 2d. Master of the Revels to make sure that there was nothing detrimental to the peace and public order. Some plays were on contemporary issues. Musicians played together as orchestras. Dancing was popular with all classes. Falconry diminished as hedges and enclosures displaced the broad expanses of land. The bought ballads from traveling pedlars. Early morning dew gathered in May and early June was thought to have special curative powers. There were parties for children. There were fewer holydays and festivals. The most prosperous period of the laborer was closing. Unemployment was widespread. There were endowed hospitals in London for the sick and infirm. They worked at jobs in the hospital according to their abilities. There was also a house of correction for discipline of the idle and vicious by productive work. The towns held a market once a week. Fairs occurred once or twice a year. Their houses were marked and they had to carry a white rod when outside. The quarantine of a person lasted for forty days. The straw in his house was burned and his clothes treated. People who died had to be buried under six feet of ground. There was an outbreak of plague in London roughly every ten years. There was a pity for the distressed that resulted in towns voting money for a people of a village that had burned down or been decimated by the plague. Communities were taxed for the upkeep and relief of the prisoners in the gaols in their communities. Church of England as an official part of the governing apparatus of the nation. Hooker restated the concept of Aristotle that the purpose of society is to enable men to live well. From this came the idea that the state derives its authority from the will of the people and the consent of the governed. She always looked for ways to accommodate all views on what religious aspects to adopt or decline. Protestant view that they were commemorative only. Communion was celebrated only at Easter and other great festivals. Attendance at state church services on Sunday mornings and evenings and Holydays was enforced by a fine of 12d. Babies were to be baptized before they were one month old or the parents would be punished. Queen issued a proclamation ordering them to leave the realm because their pernicious opinions could corrupt the church. They were incorporated into statute in 1571 establishing them as the tenets of the official religion of England. Christ and not by a sect. Roman Catholic practice. Supper were recognized. Excommunication was limited to those who openly denounced the church. Anyone openly breaking the traditions or ceremonies of the church which were approved by common authority were to be rebuked. Elizabeth expressed to the bishops her preference for ministers who were honest and wise instead of learned in religious matters. The Bible was read at home and familiar to everyone. This led to the growth of the Puritan movement. The Puritans believed in the right of the individual Christian to interpret the Scriptures for himself by spiritual illumination. They opposed the mystical interpretation of the Communion service. The Puritans complained that the church exerted insufficient control over the morals of the congregation. Their ideas of morality were very strict and even plays were thought to be immoral. John Calvin of Geneva. The act of conversion was a common experience among the early Puritans. The concomitant hatred of past sins and love of God which was felt in thankfulness for mercy were proof of selection for salvation. The office of archbishop should be eliminated and the head of state should not necessarily be governor of the church. These ideas were widely disseminated in books and pamphletts. Sunday afternoons and on weekdays. These were given gratuitously or funded by boroughs. They enforced a strict moral discipline on themselves. Mary of Scotland after the Queen had told him to hold it until she directed otherwise. The puritans formed a party in the House of Commons. The debased coinage was replaced by a recoinage of newly minted coins with a true silver weight. They began to borrow at interest at one rate in order to lend out to traders at a higher rate. Patents were begun to encourage the new merchant lords to develop local manufactures or to expand import and export trade. Patents were for a new manufacture or an improved older one and determined the wages of its trades. There was chartering of merchant companies and granting of exclusive rights to new industries as monopolies. Some monopolies or licenses were patents or copyrights of inventors. Others established trading companies for trade to certain foreign lands and supporting consular services. People holding monopolies were accountable to the government. The device of joint stock might take the form of a fully incorporated body or of a less formal and unincorporated syndicate. Dutch East India Company. It was given a fifteen year monopoly on trade east of the southern tip of Africa. Purchase of a share in a voyage was the most common method. A share for the first ship cost 100 pounds. Town government was often controlled by a few merchant wholesalers. The entire trade of a town might be controlled by its drapers or by a company of the Merchant Adventurers of London. There were policies of insurance given by groups of people for losses of ships and their goods. Marine insurance was regulated. New companies were incorporated for many trades. They were associations of employers rather than the old guilds which were associations of actual workers. The ostensible reason was the supervision of the quality of the wares produced in that trade. They paid heavily for their patents or charters. There was no sharp line between craftsman and shopkeeper or between shopkeeper and wholesale merchant. Borrowing money for a new enterprise was common. Industrial suburbs grew up around London and some towns became known as specialists in certain industries. The company of painters was chartered with a provision prohibiting painting by persons not apprenticed for seven years. The prosperous merchants began to form a capitalistic class as capitalism grew. The price of wheat rose to an average of 14s. There was steady inflation. The complications of the open system with its endless quarrels and lawsuits were avoided. The breed of horses and cattle was improved. There were specializations such as the hunting horse and the coach horse. One with under 100 pounds but over 100 marks yearly had to keep one gelding for a light horseman. There were no longer any wild boar or wild cattle. Manure and dressings were used to fertilize the soil. Hay became a major crop because it could be grown on grazing lands and required little care. The coal trade was given a monopoly. Lead was used for windows and roofs. Copper and brass were used to make pots and pans. Competition was the mainspring of trade and therefore of town life. People carried passes for travel that certified they were of good conduct and not a vagrant or sturdy rogue. Bands of roving vagabonds terrorized the countryside. Queen sent her official mail by four royal postal routes along high roads from London to various corners of the nation. There were many more wayfaring traders operating from town inns. More locks and canals facilitated river travel. New sea navigation techniques improved voyages. They calculated tides. A log tied to a rope with knots at equal intervals was used to measure speed. There were compasses with a bearing dial on a circular plate with degrees up to 360 noted thereon. Seamen had access to compilations of Arab mathematicians and astronomers and to navigational manuals and technical works on the science of navigation and the instruments necessary for precision sailing. In 1569 John Mercator produced a map taking into account the converging of the meridians towards the pole. It was in use by 1600. Christmas was an especially festive time of good fellowship. Carols were often sung and musicians played many tunes. There was dancing and gambling. There were big dinners with many kinds of meat and drink. A hearty fire heated all the house. Many alms were given to beggars. Parliament enacted laws and voted taxes. House of Commons cooperated together. There was relatively little dissension or debating. The justices sat on the wool sacks. The House of Lords still had 55 members. Sergeant at Arms of the Commons. The Commons gradually won for its members freedom from arrest without its permission and the right of punishing and expelling members for crimes committed. The Treasury sought to keep a balanced budget by selling royal land and keeping Crown expenditures down. Theft and robbery were so usual that there were names for various techniques used. He took the chief place at any market walk and other assemblies. Violence was still a part of the texture of everyday life. Private armories and armed gangs were not uncommon. But the rebellion of the Earl of Essex in 1601 had no aftermath in violence. The Queen issued proclamations to certain counties to place vagrant soldiers or vagrants under martial law because of numerous robberies. She ordered the deportation of vagrant Irishmen in 1594. Her Council had persuaded her that it was impossible for her to live in safety otherwise. Francis Drake sailed around the world from 1577 to 1580. Spain and much going to investors. These new English ships were longer and narrower and did away with the towering superstructures at bow and stern. This made them more maneuverable and easier to sail. The English seamen had been arbitrarily pressed into this service. A royal proclamation of 1601 offered a reward of 100 pounds for information on libels against the Queen. Further the steel was mixed and of a lesser quality. This so damaged the knife and sword industry that about 2000 workers lost their jobs from it and became beggars. Monopoly was a severe burden to the middle and poorer classes. Elizabeth reduced them. I charge you to thank them of the Lower House from me. I might have fallen into the lapse of an error only for lack of true information. I am exceedingly beholding to such subjects as would move the same at the first. I embrace with a princely care. I desire not to merit. I heard it I could give no rest unto my thoughts until I had reformed it. To be a king and wear a crown is a thing more glorious to them that see it than it is pleasant to them that bear it. For it is not my desire to live or reign longer than my life and reign shall be for your good. This was to become the classic statement of the case for English colonization. England to secretly convert people to Catholicism. Catholic priests in hidden places in their homes. The possessor pleaded that the crier of the court who had warranted it should be called to defend the action. He failed to appear until after judgment had been given to the straw man. Then the straw man conveyed it to the possessor or his nominee in fee simple. Timber shall not be felled to make logs for fires for the making of iron. No one may take small fish to feed to dogs and pigs. Only nets with mesh leaving three inches spaces may be used to catch fish. All artificers and laborers hired by the day or week shall work from 5 am to 7 PM. All artificers must labor at agriculture at haytime and harvest to avoid the loss of grain or hay. Every householder who raises crops may receive as an apprentice a child between 10 and 18 to serve in agriculture until he is age 21. This was designed to inhibit migration to the towns. It excluded three fourths of the rural population. No one may be a craftsman until he has served seven years as an apprentice. Wednesdays so that there will be more fishermen and mariners and repair of ports. This was done because fishing had declined since the dissolution of the monasteries. Eating fish instead of meat in Lent in the springtime remained a tradition. No one shall libel or slander so as to cause a rebellion. A debtor may not engage in a fraudulent collusion to sell his land and goods in order to avoid his creditors. A person robbing a house of 5s. Robbers shall be pursued by horse and by foot. The price of barrels shall be set by mayors of the towns where they are sold. No man under the degree of knight may wear a hat or cap of velvet. Only hats may be made of felt. This is to assist the craft of making wool caps. Trials of noblemen for treason shall be by their peers. A native or denizen merchant in wholesale or retail goods who leaves the nation to defraud his creditors shall be declared a bankrupt. They shall be appraised and sold to satisfy his debts. Loan contracts for money lent may not be for more than 200s. All loans of money or forbearing of money in sales of goods for less than this shall be punishable by forfeit of the interest only. No cattle may be put in any enclosed woods that have been growing less than five years. Landowners of Oxford shall be taxed for the repair of the highway and bridge there. London needs the wood to make buildings and for fireplaces. Every melter and maker of wax from honeycombs shall put his mark on every piece of his wax to be sold. All barrels of honey shall bear the mark of the honeymaker. No one shall take or kill any pheasants with nets or devices at nighttime because such have become scarce. Dwelling houses beyond this must be supported by four acres of land to be continually occupied and manured as long as the dwelling house is inhabited or forfeit 40s. Cottages and dwelling houses for sailors or laborers working on ships for the sea shall be built only within a mile of the sea. A cottage may be built in a forest or park for a game keeper of the deer. More families than one may not be placed in one cottage or dwelling house. Troops of vagabonds with weapons in the highways who pretend to be soldiers or mariners have committed robberies and murders. So all vagabonds shall settle down in some service or labor or trade. Crown funds and shall be personally liable for arrears. No bishop may alienate any possession of their sees to the crown. Watermen transporting people on the Thames River shall have served as apprentice to a waterman for five years or have been the son of a waterman. This is to prevent the loss of lives and goods by inexperienced watermen. No one may make any hat unless he has served as apprentice for at least seven years. Plasterers shall cease painting because it has intruded upon the livelihoods of painters who have been apprenticed as such. Pawn brokers accepting stolen goods shall forfeit twice their value to the owner from whom stolen. No butcher may be a tanner. No one may be a tanner unless apprenticed as such for seven years or the son or wife of a tanner who has tanned for four years or a son or daughter of a tanner who inherits his tanhouse. Only tanners may buy raw hides. Only leatherworkers may buy leather. Curriers may not be tanners. Curriers may not refuse to curry leather. Fishermen and their guides may continue to use the coastland for their fishing activities despite the trespass to landowners. This is to stop the badness of such cloth. Persons affected by the plague may not leave their houses or be deemed felons and suffer death. This is to avoid further infection. The towns may tax their inhabitants for the relief of infected persons. All persons must go to the established church on Sundays and holy days. The penalty was at first forfeiture 12d. But if the goods are not worth 800s. There is also a 100 pound penalty for the persons who sent him. The second offence is a felony. Crown is a felony without benefit of clergy. Oxford and one at Cambridge. Archbishop of Canterbury or the Bishop of London. But printers continued to print unlicensed material. Jurors shall be selected from those people who have at least 80s. Also there had been inflation. Defendants sued or informed against upon penal statutes may appear by attorney so that they may avoid the inconvenience of traveling a long distance to attend and put to bail. A hundred shall answer for any robbery therein only if there has been negligence or fault in pursuit of the robber after a hue and cry is made because the past law has been too harsh and required payment for offenses from people unable to pay who have done everything reasonable to catch the robber. Its procedure was inquisitory rather than accusative. Silence could be taken for a confession of guilt. Queen Elizabeth chose not to sit on this court. The gentry was exempt from whipping. It also heard matters of domestic morals. The clergyman who adopts a prayer book other that the prescribed one commits a crime. Excommunication has imprisonment behind it. They held petty and quarter sessions. There were about 50 Justices of the Peace per county. They performed these duties for the next 200 years. The Justices of Assize rode on circuit twice a year to enforce the criminal law and reported their assessment of the work of the Justices of the Peace back to the Privy Council. The duty to hear and determine felonies was taken from Justices of the Peace by 1590. The Justices of Assize did this work. Accused people could wait for years in gaol before their case was heard. The penalty was death. Many people were hanged for the felony of theft over 12d. Some bold men accused of felony refused to plead so that they could not be tried and found guilty. They died of heavy weights being placed on their bodies. But then their property could go to their heirs. Court of Common Pleas or Chancery. Chancery interrogated defendants. Chancery often issued injunctions against suits in the common law courts. Trial by combat was very rare. Pleadings had to be in writing and oral testimony was given by sworn witnesses. Case decisions are in books compiled by various reporters who sit in on court hearings rather than in year books. The abstract concept of contract as an agreement between two parties which is supported by consideration is developing as the number of various agreements that are court enforceable expands. Case in 1595 in the Court of Wards on the construction of a deed. A sold land to B for 400s. It was held that the transaction was not examinable except for fraud and that A was therefore estopped. The heir is estopped from falsifying the consideration acknowledged in the deed of feoffment of his ancestor. And although the said I. And this by the statutes . A last example of a case concerning consideration is that of Assaby and Others against Lady Anne Manners and Others. And all this matter was found in assize by Assaby and others against Lady Anne Manners and others. Yet error was alleged. The judgment in the assize is affirmed. A can sell or devise this interest. Edward Shelley was a tenant in tail general. The younger son entered the land and leased it to a third party. He entered the land and ejected the third party. The third party was lawfully ejected. This inflation gradually impoverished those living on fixed wages. Landlords could insist on even shorter leases and higher rents. London quadrupled in population. The accompanying extinguishment of common rights was devastating to small tenants and cottagers. Gentry and yeomen benefited greatly. There was a gradual consolidation of the land into fewer hands and demise of the small family farm. Prices finally flattened out in the 1620s. Society became polarized with a wealthy few growing wealthier and a mass of poor growing poorer. This social stratification became a permanent fixture of English society. More subdivided land holdings in the country made holdings of cottagers miniscule. But these were eligible for parish relief under the poor laws. Beside them were substantial numbers of rogues and vagabonds wandering the roads. These vagrants were usually young unmarried men. There were no more licensed liveries of lords. People moved only within their own class. Each class had a separate existence as well as a different life style from the other classes. So each class developed a wariness of other classes. They employed many servants and could live a life of leisure. Gentlemen usually had positions of responsibility such as lords of manors and leaders in their parishes. These families often sent the oldest son to university to become a Justice of the Peace and then a member of Parliament. They also served as justices and as county officers such as High Constable of their hundred and grand jury member. These titles were acquired by being the son of such or purchase. The gentry had also profited by commerce and colonial possessions. The country life of a country squire or gentleman dealt with all the daily affairs of a farm. He takes part in the haying and getting cut grass under cover when a rain came. He drags his pond and takes out great carps. His horses stray and he finds them in the pound. Boys are bound to him for service. Knaves steal his sheep. He and a neighbor argue about the setting up of a cottage. He holds a leet court. He attends church on Sunday and reads the lesson when called upon. He visits the local tavern to hear from his neighbors. Many gentlemen spent their fortunes and died poor. New gentlemen from the lower classes took their place. The second class included the wealthier merchants and professional men of the towns. These men were prominent in town government. Also included in this second group were the most prosperous yeomanry of the countryside. Parliamentary elections. No longer was there a central great hall. Cooking was done in a kitchen or over the open fire in the fireplace of the main room. Dishware was wood or pewter. The yeomen were among those who governed the nation. They preserved fruits candied or in syrup. They sometimes cared for the poor and sold produce at the market. Justices of the Peace for exercising a craft without having served an apprenticeship. They had neither voice nor authority in government. Also in this class were the independent urban craftsmen who were not town freemen. Their only voice in government was at the parish level. They were dependent on day labor. Accordingly they also farmed a little on their four acres of land with garden. Some also had a few animals. Theirs was a constant battle for survival. They often moved because of deprivation to seek opportunity elsewhere. The fourth and fifth classes comprised about three fourths of the population. Over one fourth of all households had servants. Those who sewed got additional pay for this work. There was no great chasm between the family and the servants. They did not segregate into a parlor class and a kitchen class. The top servants were as educated as their masters and ate at the same table. Great households had a chaplain and a steward to oversee the other servants. There was usually a cook. Lower servants ate together. Servants were disciplined by cuffs and slaps and by the rod by master or mistress. Chamber maids helped to dress their mistresses. I would not part with him were I not to go post to the North. Dress was not as elaborate as in Elizabethan times. Men also wore earrings. Watches with elaborate cases were common. The corset was greatly reduced. Men also wore their hair in ringlets. Rouge was worn by lower class women. The law dictating what clases could wear what clothes was difficult to enforce and the last one was in 1597. India were fashionable as dress fabrics. Its inexpensiveness made these items affordable for many. London which could be operated by a novice. Even large houses now tended to do without a courtyard and became compacted into one soaring and stately whole. Meals were increasingly eaten in a parlor. Noble men preferred to be waited upon by pages and grooms instead of by their social equals. Chests of drawers richly carved or inlaid and with brass handles were coming in. Walls were wainscotted and had pictures or were hung with tapestry. Underneath is a cellar. Apprentices and shop boys had to sleep under the counter. Country laborers slept in a loft on straw. Bread was made in each household. There were bedroom chairs with enclosed chamber pots. Wood fires were the usual type. Coal was coming in to use in the towns and near coal mines. Charcoal was also used. People still licked their fingers at meals. Tallow dips were used by the poor and for the kitchen. Some mead was also drunk. Tea was a rare and expensive luxury. Coffee was a new drink. The potato caused the advent of distillation of alcohol from fermented potato mashes. By November the fall planting was finished and the time had come for the killing of cattle and hanging up their salted carcasses for winter meat. Stock that could not live outdoors in winter were brought into barns. Government regulated the economy. Justices of the Peace to buy grain and sell it below cost. It forbade employers to lay off workers whose products they could not sell. It used the Star Chamber Court to enforce economic regulations. The rioters were seldom punished more than a fining or whipping of the leaders and action was taken to satisfy the legitimate grievances of the rioters. The poor came to resent the rich and there was a rise in crime among the poor. Penal laws were frequently updated in an effort to bring more order. Drainage of extensive marsh land created more land for agriculture. An unskilled laborer received 1s. There were conventions of paternalism and deference between neighbors of unequal social status. Even the poor were buried in coffins. Quarrelling was commonplace. Neighbors generally got along well and frequently borrowed and loaned small sums of money to each other without interest for needs that suddenly arose. There was also whipping and the stocks. Marital sex was thought to be good for the health and happiness of the husband and enjoyable by wives. The possibility of female orgasm was encouraged. Most women were in a virtual state of perpetual pregnancy. Both Catholics and Protestants thought that God wanted them to multiply and cover the earth. Catholics thought that the only goal of sex was procreation. Women usually married at about age 25. The aristocracy often initiated matches of their children for the sake of continuity in the family estates and tried to obtain the consent of their children for the match in mind. The age of consent to marry was 14 for boys and 12 for girls. But the girls usually stayed with their parents for a couple of years before living with their husbands. Dowries and marriage portions usually were given by the parents of the bride. There were no baby bottles. Adultery was subject to church court sanctions as was defamation for improper sexual conduct. In reality wives did not fit the image of women portrayed by the church and literature. Wives of the gentry ran their households with their husbands. Mothers handed down their recipes to their daughters. Puritan women did less of this work. Jointures were negotiated at the betrothal of ladies. But most testators went beyond this and gave a life interest in the farm or family house. So it was customary for a widow to remain in occupation of the land until her death or remarriage. Few widow or widowers lived with one of their children. The other part went according to his will. But remarriage was common because the life expectancy after birth was about 35 years. Sometimes a son was sent to the house of a great man as a page or esquire to learn the ways of courtiers and perhaps become a diplomat. The guild with its master and their employees was being replaced by a company of masters. There was a Catholic plot in 1605 to blow up Parliament and the king with gunpowder and to restore Catholicism as the state religion with a Catholic king. It was discovered and the conspirators were executed. Catholics from many offices. James I ruled over both England and Scotland. English love of their rights and passion for liberty and justice. Religion was much discussed by all and scripture was frequently quoted. He tried to imbue into England the idea of a divine right of kings to rule that he had held in Scotland. The established church quickly endorsed and preached this idea. Some patrons sold the right of selection to a tradesman or yeoman who wished to put in his son or a relative. The parish clergyman was appointed for life and removed only for grave cause. Most parishoners wanted a sermon created by their minister instead of repetitious homilies and constant prayer. They thought that the object of worship in church was to rouse men to think and act about the problems of the world. The Puritan movement grew. Protestants were Puritans. These included country gentlemen and wealthier traders. They dressed simply in gray or other drab colors and wore their hair short to protest the fashion of long curls. They lived simply and disapproved of dancing because it induced lasciviousness and of theater because of its lewdness. Maypole celebrations because of their paganism. Puritans prayed several times a day and read the Bible to each other in family groups to look for guidance in their conduct and life. They circulated records of puritan lives including spiritual diaries. Puritan influence made families closer and not merely dependent on the will of the husband or father. There was a sense of spiritual fellowship among family members as individuals. Most Puritans felt that the bishops were as tyrannical as the pope had been and that more reform was needed. They favored the Presbyterian form of church government developed by John Calvin in Switzerland. The presbyter was the position below bishop. Parishes were governed by boards consisting of a minister and lay elders elected by the parishioners. These boards sent elected representatives to councils. All lay elders and ministers had equal rank with each other. Puritans had an optimism about avoiding this damnation. They believed that at his conversion a person received grace and became predestined for salvation. They rejected all ecclesiastical institutions except as established by each parish over its own elected pastor and members. They believed in negotiating directly with God for the welfare of the soul without the priest or church organization. The fear of witchcraft grew with Puritanism. Also women could carry rushes to decorate the church as they had done in the past. Still unlawful on Sunday was bear and bull baitings and bowlings. The Baptists emerged out of the Independents. Babies of wealthier families had nurses. The babies of ladies were suckled by wet nurses. Puritan aversion to Christmas pudding and sense of conscious virtue. Block alphabets were just coming in. Most market towns had a grammar school which would qualify a student for university. Multiplication was taught. They thereby got experience for a future in public life. The system was also a check on bullying of the weak by the strong. Private schools for girls were founded in and around London. Fewer served in the house of some noble lady as before. A tutor in the house educated the girls to the same extent as the boys. A considerable number of girls of other backgrounds such as the yeomanry and the town citizenry somehow learned to read and write. There was a humanist ideal of a gentleman scholar. The method of study based largely on lectures and disputations. Each fellow had about five students to tutor. The students slept in trundle beds around his bed and had an adjacent room for study. Scholasticism was only starting to give way to modern studies. Greek treatise of Hermogenes of Tarsus. Examination for degrees was by disputation over a thesis of the student. Many of the men who continued for advanced degrees became fellows and took part in the teaching. Most fellowships were restricted to clerics. Oxford and Cambridge Universities operated under a tutorial system. Access to grammar schools and universities was closed to girls of whatever class. Oxford University now had the Bodleian Library. Fellows at High Table. They put on stage plays in Latin and English. They were not to have irreligious books or dogs. Cards and dice could be played only at Christmas time. Sometimes a disputation between two colleges turned into a street brawl. Punishment was by flogging. England or on the continent. The tutor sometimes accompanied his student to grammar school or university. Puritans frequently sent their sons to board in the house of some Frenchman or Swiss Protestant to learn the Calvinist doctrines or on tour with a tutor. Certain halls in the universities were predominately Puritan. Some American colonists sent their sons there. After two years they became Mootmen or Inner Barristers. There was no formal examination. The Utter Barrister spent at least three more years performing exercises and assisting in directing the studies of the younger men. College of Physicians and Surgeons. Regius Professor of Medicine and saw a few dissections. Three years of study gave them a M. Smallpox was quickly recognized. It was ameliorated by mercury. Otherwise women were attended only by midwives. The theory of nutrition was still based on the four humors and deficiency diseases were not understood as such. He had studied anatomy at Padua on the continent and received an M. Then he accepted a position at the hospital of St. Bartholomew to treat the poor who came there at least once a week for a year. He also dissected animals. Then he ascertained that the heart was a pump and that the valves in the veins prevented backflow and he followed the course of the circulation. This diminished the religious concept that the heart was the seat of the soul and that blood had a spiritual significance and was sacred. A visit by a physician cost 13s. So there were anatomy textbooks and anatomy was related to surgery. Internal operations usually resulted in death. Apprenticeship was the route to becoming a surgeon. A College of Surgeons was founded. College of Physicians to see that they were not selling evil potions or poisons. In 1618 was the first pharmacy book. Hospital for the insane. Theaters were shut down in times of plague to prevent spread of disease there. Towndwellers who could afford it left to live in the country. Shakespeare wrote most of his plays. Many households had an almanac. Books tried to reconcile religion and science and religion and passion or sensuality. Ben Johnson wrote poetry and satiric comedies. Almost all gentlemen and professional men were literate. About half the yeomen and tradesmen and craftsmen were. Postmasters got regular pay for handling without charge the mail of letters that came from or went to the letter office in London. The post was to travel 7 mph in summer and 5 mph in winter and sound his horn four times in every mile or whenever he met travelers. The influx of silver from the New World was a major factor in the second great inflation in England and in the devaluation of money to about one third of what it had been. This inflation benefited tenants to the detriment of their lords because their rents could not be adjusted upward. There was an increase in bankruptcies. The violin was introduced and popular with all classes. She tied blue ribbons on his head when he went to college to let the maidens know that he was married. Day was changed to January 1st. James introduced it into England. James I was the last monarch to engage in falconry. He advocated a process of elimination of ideas. He also studied the effect of cold in preventing animal putrefaction. This disproved the widely held theory that heavier objects fall faster than light objects. He proved that the force of gravity has the same effect on all objects regardless of their size or weight. For this he measured time with water running out of a vessel. He conceived of the air offering a resistant force to an object in motion. So motion need not be explained by the continuing force of a prime mover. He realized that the movement of a projectile involved a horizontal and a vertical component and guessed that the effects of falling were independent of the horizontal motion. The telescope was invented in 1608. Galileo built a greatly improved telescope using a lens to look at the skies. He noticed that the planet Jupiter has moons orbiting it. He noted that the planet Venus progresses through phases similar to those of the moon orbiting the earth and that it was very large with a crescent shape or very small with a round shape. Galileo was denounced by the church. He argued against a literal interpretation of the Bible. His observation that certain sun spots were on certain locations of the sun but changed over time suggested that the sun might be rotating. Copernican theory was unexpectedly popular when published in 1632. The general public was so persuaded by the arguments that the earth revolved around the sun that Papal authority felt threatened. Galileo recanted and some of the inquisition judges who convicted him believed the Copernican theory and their decision did not assert the contrary. He explored imaginary numbers such as the square roots of negative numbers. This simplified calculations because the multiplication and division of numbers would be equivalent to addition and subtraction of their exponents. It reduced the enormous labor involved in trigonometric calculations. Johannes Kepler was a mathematician from Germany who made his living as an astrologer. Europe were with each other. He discerned that the orbit of Mars was not perfectly circular. He knew that the apparent path of the sun with respect to the constellation of fixed stars differed in speed at different times of the year. He opined that this showed that the speed of the earth revolving around the sun varied according to the time of year. Then he measured the angles between the earth and the sun and the earth and Mars as they changed through the Martian year. Sun were on the same straight line. Kepler also confirmed that the paths of comets were governed by a law and were farther from the earth from the moon. Analytic geometry aided in making good lenses for eyeglasses. The glass was first manufactured with attention to quality. Descartes pioneered the standard exponential notation for cubes and higher powers of numbers. This explained why a rainbow is circular. Descartes feared persecution by the church. The human mind was spirit and could exist outside the human body. Ideas and imagination were innate. He expressed that it was error to believe that there are no bodies around us except those perceivable by our senses. He cultivated the method of experiment and of inductive reasoning from observation and insisted on the need for a search for knowledge not in books but in things themselves. The vertical dip of the needle was explained by the magnetic attraction of the north pole. He expounded the idea of Copernicus that the earth revolves around the sun in a solar system. Coal was transported from the coal pits down to the rivers to be loaded onto ships on coal wagons riding on wooden rails. The full coal cars could then be sent down by gravity and the empty wagons pulled up by horses. A tapestry factory was established in 1619. Edward Coke was impassioned and melodramatic. But there Coke propounded a doctrine of the supremacy of the law over the king as well as over Parliament. But the other eleven justices did agree. Catholic Spain and intended taking of a Spanish wife. This made judicial review important. Many in the Commons were Puritan in sympathy. House of Commons developed a committee system to avoid being presided over by the royally designated speaker. A committee could consist of all the members of the House of Commons with an elected chairman. An increasing number of issues were discussed in committee before coming to the Commons and the Commons came to ratify readily what had been done in committee. Parliament of imprisoning for a time those who had been too outspoken. The Commons also asserted itself into foreign affairs by expressing an opinion against a treaty proposed by the king on which war could ensue. The treaty was abandoned. House of Commons rather than just seeking out a friendly Privy Council member. James frightened him into canceling many of them. He had made many grants against competition in violation of law. The right of the Commons to expel a member was asserted by the expulsion of a monopolist. They formed commissions to study situations and sent orders to Justices of the Peace on methods to address certain problems and to Sheriffs to carry out certain acts. James sold high offices of state to supplement his income. His income from customs had increased so much that it was now three times that from Crown lands. The Sheriff looked after Crown lands and revenues in his county. He was still a means of communication between the Privy Council and the county. He announced new statutes of Parliament and proclamations by the king at the county courts and in the markets. He used posse comitatus to disperse riots. He carried out elections of members of the House of Commons. There were two high constables for each hundred. They were the intermediaries between the justices and the petty constables. The petty constable was the executive official of the village. He was usually elected by the suitors to the leet court of the manor for a year. He often visited the alehouse to learn of any trouble in the making. He would inform the justice of plots to trespass or forcibly enter land to take possession. He saw to it that no new cottages were built in the villages without due authority. He supervised markets and inns. He reported lapses of care for apprentices by their masters to the justice. He arrested and whipped vagrants and sturdy rogues and sent them back to their place of birth through constables on the way. He made inquiry into the paternity of the coming child of an unmarried pregnant girl to make him take responsibility for the child and pay her 8d. He pressed men into military service. Monopoly status made the Company competitive with the Dutch and Portuguese monopoly companies. The Crown received a gift or a loan from the Company in return. Company raised capital for each separate voyage. But voyages tried to undercut each other and rival factions squabbled over cargoes. Subscriptions were called in by yearly installments and dividends paid out yearly. These dockyards were so technologically advanced that they were daily viewed by visitors and ambassadors. More than 200 craftsmen were directly employed in the yard. Virginia Company was issued for trading purposes. Crown appointed a council. Virginia established the Episcopal Church by law. Henry Hudson to find a northwest passage through North America to the Pacific Ocean. They were imprisoned and their houses were watched day and night for illegal meetings. New England and founded Plymouth Colony. They planted fields and made friends with the Indians. Massachusetts Bay Colony. Church sanctuary was abolished for those accused of criminal offenses because it had been abused by thieves paying their rent by thieving at night. It remained available to those accused of civil offenses. Churchwardens of every parish shall oversee the poor in their parish. Child apprentices may be bound until 21 years of age or until time of marriage. They shall account to the Justices of the Peace for all money received and paid. The penalty for absence or neglect is 20s. Two Justices of the Peace may commit to gaol or house of correction persons refusing to work and disobedient churchwardens and overseers. The county treasurer shall keep registers and accounts. Soldiers begging shall lose their pension and shall be adjudged a common rogue or vagabond subject to imprisonment and punishment. Sheriffs summoning defendants without a writ shall pay 200s. Persons stealing crops from lands or fruit from trees shall be whipped. Beer may be exported when malt is at 16s. Spawning and growing fish in harbors may not be taken by any nets or weirs because this practice has hurt fishermen and the realm. London may make a trench to bring water to the north part of the city and shall compensate the owners of lands by agreement with them of an amount or an amount determined by commissioners. Holy Ghost on stage are to be penalized 200s. No one shall sell beer or ale to an unlicensed alehousekeeper because abuses there have become intolerable. Every person convicted of drunkenness shall be penalized 5s. Offenders convicted a second time shall be bound with two sureties to the sum of 200s. Money given by will for the apprenticeship of poor children shall be managed by incorporated towns and unincorporated parishes. Masters receiving such apprentices shall become bound with sufficient sureties. Houses of correction shall be built in every county. Persons deserting their families shall be deemed incorrigible rogues and punished as such. Elizabeth shall be incorporated and have perpetual succession. Crown for the last sixty years are confirmed against the Crown. This does not include London or towns. Papists running a school must forfeit 40s. In 1604 it was decided that it was not necessary to prove witchcraft caused the death of a person for there to be punishment for it. All that was necessary now was the practice of witchcraft. The punishment was death by hanging. These written slanders or libels were viewed as incitements to disorder and private vengeance. Coke waged a long battle with his wife over her extensive property and the selection of a husband for their daughter. His disposing of it to another is the same as reducing it into his own possession. A settlement made after marriage will entitle the representative of the husband to such as estate in preference to the wife. Defendants may not petition to remove a case to the Westminster courts after a jury is selected because such has resulted in unnecessary expense to plaintiffs and delay for defendants in which they suborn perjury by obtaining witnesses to perjure themselves. James I asserted an authority to determine the jurisdiction between the various courts. It also enforced monopolies. Justices of the Peace of a hundred for a court of intermediate instance and appointed overseers of the poor. It heard appeals expressly allowed by statute. This writ of certiorari ceased in the 1700s. Justices of the Peace. Their main duty was to keep the peace. Two justices or more had the authority to arrest the rioters and send a record of it to the assizes and to the Privy Council. They tried to draw these men into confession by questioning. Mediation by the local constable often took place. Assault cases were common in courts of assize and courts of quarter sessions. The quarter sessions were those of a number of Justices of the Peace held for a couple of days four times a year for the more important cases in the jurisdiction of the Justices of the Peace. Assault was violence or threat of imminent violence. Most involved offenders and victims who were neighbors and included people of substantial standing in the village. But most of the poor never stole. Most homicides were the result of an impassioned argument leading to blows inflicted by nearby commonplace items picked up and used as weapons. Men were still declared outlaw if they failed to come to court after repeated summons. An attorney who allows another to use his name shall forfeit 400 shillings and be disbarred. Chancery could order injunctions to stop activities. Bench held that assumpsit may be brought in place of the action of debt. A statute of 1623 gave rights for adverse possession. Ralegh had not yet seen. He was charged with treason in plotting with Catholic Spain to put Arabella Stuart on the throne. Spain in her marriage choice. Coke outright bullying him. Ralegh was given permission to speak. He said that Cobham had retracted his confession. He pointed to a treatise he had written to the king on the present state of Spain and reasons against peace. Cecil gave an oration of Ralegh. Ralegh asked to have his accuser brought before him face to face. He cited law that two witnesses were necessary for a conviction for treason. Coke added that it would be improper to call Cobham because he was a party. Then Coke surprised Ralegh with a letter from Cobham stating that Ralegh had asked Cobham to procure him an annual pension of 1500 pounds from Spain for disclosing intelligence. He admitted that it was a fault not to inform authorities of this offer. The jury deliberated for fifteen minutes and returned with a verdict of guilty. Church courts were revived after a period of disuse. It was granted in only a few cases and only to the very wealthy. Coke said that a maxim of the common law was that no man ought to be judge in his own cause. Parliament with respect to the validity of statutes. Constitution to decide all disputed questions. Female scolds were still dunked into water as punishment. Attorneys and solicitors prepared cases for barristers and practiced before minor courts. James I often intimidated the justices to see things his way. Well and and truly ye shall serve the King and his people. Ye shall counsel our Sovereign Lord the King in his need. And ye shall not delay any person of common right for the letters of the King or of any person or for any other cause . Chancery all met simultaneously in Westminster Hall. The hall was so cold that people kept on their coats and hats. The last court case concerning villeinage was in 1618. They were named by their opponents for the Spanish caballero who was a Catholic who prosecuted Protestants. Their fancy jackets and breeches were loose. Boots were wide and folded over at the top. Young men wore earrings and painted their faces. A lady wore her hair in ringlets on each side of her face. It was low at the shoulders with a scoop neckline in front. Only hose of silk was worn at court. Wool replaced silk and velvet. The Puritan women also wore long white aprons. London apprentices whose rioting had marked every stage of the conflict between king and Parliament. The Puritan women smoothed their hair back into little knobs and covered their hair and head with a white covering. French by Francis Hawkins. The Flemish Johann Baptista van Helmont demonstrated that metals dissolved in acid can be recovered through chemical means and enunciated the doctrine that each thing in nature has its own specific organization. Puritan who accepts the gospel of work. He is a staid and serious businessman. A hasty or worldly marriage would bring repentance. Children should not be spoiled. Couches were coming into use in parlors. The king and his court entourage settled for most of the year in Whitehall instead of travelling around the country. The king let the public into Hyde Park for recreation. The water carrier was still active and the night transport of sewage necessary. Bailiffs did not dare venture into them because the inhabitants hid and defended each other unless the offense was a major one. The penalty for stealing even small sums was still death. Indigo Jones was the first architect of consequence. He had studied in Italy and designed and built the Banqueting House at Whitehall in London in 1622. It had classical proportions and nice shaping and dressing in stone. They stood in stark contrast to the Tudor buildings around them. London with Covent Garden fruit and vegetable market with terraced houses around a central piazza surrounded by open arcades with a Tuscan church at one end. Hackney introduced a line of coaches rented at 1s. They soon became very popular. A large part of England was rebuilt as yeomen expanded their houses and others lower in rank replaced mud and wood hovels with brick and stone cottages. A separate kitchen appeared. The ground floors are boarded over to create bedrooms. Permanent stairs replace ladders. Glass appears in windows. Chairs replace benches. Knives and forks become common. About 1640 began travel between towns by covered wagons called stage coaches. They carried passengers and goods and stopped at inns for stabling and repairs. Work was begun in 1630 to make canals that would make waters run to the sea. Barges on canals were the most efficient mode of transportation. A barge could carry 50 tons on a canal and only 30 on a river. Hoarding of foodstuffs was to be punished. Fish days and lent were to be observed to maintain the fishers. Abstaining from suppers on Fridays and on the eves of feasts was ordered in all taverns and commended to private families. City corporations were to give up their usual feasts and half the charge given to the poor. Foreign ships were not to be victualled for long voyages. But the economy was still volatile. Royalist City elite versus the middling and lesser merchants and craftsmen. The gunmakers also broke away from the Blacksmiths. The tinplate workers broke away from the Ironmongers. Charles issued a commission for the reformation of the cloth industry with minute directions for the manufacture of cloth. But there were many disagreements over the details of manufacture and reform was difficult to enforce. They were educated and highly learned. They had libraries and were in touch with contemporary religious debates. They saw their role primarily as pastoral care. Many wanted to improve the religious knowledge and moral conduct of their parishioners. They punished superstitious conduct. They initiated prosecutions in church courts for sexual lapses and drunkenness. The church court had little coercive power and its punishments were restricted to penance or excommunication. Many Puritan sects espoused equality for women. These sects were mostly composed of the lower echelons of society. He issued directives to reverse jury verdicts. Parliamentarians Oliver Cromwell and other educated men opposed this view. Charles dissolved Parliament before this passed. He continued to take tonnage and poundage. They included many of which had fallen into disuse. Bail was denied to these men. It was customary to quarter them in inns and public houses at royal expense. Martial law was declared and soldiers were executed. But the citizens did not want martial law either. The Magna Carta got attention as a protector of basic liberties. Magna Carta from 1215 to 1225. Parliament allowed it. England into a school of political discussion. Oxford University favored the established church and Cambridge University was Puritan. The members of the House of Commons were elected by the people. House of Commons asserted a preeminence to the House of Lords. Magna Carta and sought to fix definite bounds between royal power and the power of the law. It protested the loans compelled under pain of imprisonment and stated that no tax or the like should be exacted without the common consent of Parliament. It also protested the billeting of soldiers in private houses and martial law trying soldiers and sailors. In 1629 Parliament distinguished between treason to the king and treason to the Commonwealth. Parliament make no difference. But the people refused to pay these taxes. Charles thought of more ways to obtain money and disregarded his agreement to the Petition of Right. It was used to outfit ships for the protection of the coasts. Hampden refused to pay it on principle and the courts ruled against him in the case of King v. John Hampden and he was sent to prison. The bailiffs were pelted with rocks when they came to distrain. One man used his pitchfork to take back his steer being taken by the bailiff. Charles revived the right of the Crown to force knighthood on the landed gentry for a fee. Fines were levied on people for the redress of defects in their title deeds. Crown forest boundaries were arbitrarily extended and landowners near Crown forests were heavily fined for their encroachments on them. Crown to save itself from demolition. But what incensed the people more than the money issue were the changes in the established church. Puritan feeling in every parish. Bowing was to be done when approaching them. Rings were to be used in marriages and crosses used in baptisms. Churchwardens were to take oaths to inform against any who disobeyed. The law still required that all attend Sunday sermons. Puritan preaching in public meetings. Preaching or printing matter concerning the controversy of free will versus predestination was forbidden. Many were excommunicated for sitting instead of kneeling at communion. The Ritualists encouraged certain sports to be played after church on Sunday. The Puritans protested vehemently to this because they wanted to strictly observe the sabbath. The Puritans saw the high churchmen as wanting to return to the doctrine and customs they thought to be Papist. Jesus or wear the surplice. It was used against the Puritans and imposed high fines and imprisonment for religious eccentricity and Puritan preaching. Charles supported the established church in this endeavor because it agreed that he had a divine right to rule. The universities and high churchmen were beginning to adopt the doctrine of free will over predestination. Parliamentarian and Puritan Oliver Cromwell and others feared this presaged a return to justification by works and the popish faith. Puritans emigrated to Virginia and New England. Massachusetts Bay Colony was chartered at the instigation of John Winthrop as a Puritan refuge. The fare was five pounds and an applicant was interviewed to make sure he was a Puritan. Catholics in England could practice their religion only in their homes and could not carry arms. In 1640s effective government control of the press collapsed. In 1640 the canons of the church included a requirement for parsons to exclaim divine right of kings every year. The Commons soon resolved that this was contrary to the fundamental laws and liberties of the realm. The Short Parliament of 1640 was dissolved soon because the Commons demanded redress of its grievances. House of Lords was agreed to by Charles because he still wanted money. Commons ceased to agree on all issues and started to rely on majority rule. Parliament or exercising any temporal authority. It passed measures which were not agreed to by the King. It undid the lawless acts of the King and the court decision in the case of King v. Ship money was declared illegal. The new concept that the present Parliament should not be dissolved but by its own consent was adopted. The Star Chamber and Court of High Commission were abolished. Star Chamber and the Court of High Commission. No one may be compelled to take knighthood nor undergo any fine for not so doing. The forest boundaries are returned to their former place. Further it opposed the restraint of reprinting books formerly licensed without relicensing. Many Londoners signed this petition. The House of Commons decided to forbid bowing at the name of Jesus. Jesus or toward the east end of the church or toward the communion table was forbidden. All dancing or other sports on Sunday was forbidden. Enforcement was to be done by Justices of the Peace and Mayors. But these orders never became statutes. Catholics had a respite. Rebellion of Irish Catholics against England and English Protestants broke out in Ireland in 1641. King with an army that he could use against themselves so it passed the following two measures expanding the Navy and calling out the militia and naming certain persons to be Lieutenants of each county. The Admiral shall impress as many seamen as necessary for the defense of the realm. Justices of the Peace shall impress as many soldiers as the king may order for war in Ireland. This is despite the right of a citizen to be free from being compelled to go out of his county to be a soldier because the danger from Ireland is imminent. King issued a Proclamation ordering the soldiers to ignore this order and obey him. So Parliament declared this Proclamation void. Scots to invade England. King entered Parliament with 300 soldiers to arrest these five. Parliament was shocked that the King had threatened the liberties of Parliament with military force. Both sides raised big armies. The goal of the Parliamentarians was to capture the King alive and force him to concessions. Sundays because such has led to quarrels and bloodshed and nonattendance at church. No carrier with any horse or wagon or cart or drover with cattle may travel on Sunday or forfeit 20s. No butcher may kill or sell any victual on Sunday or forfeit 6s. Offenders convicted a second time shall be bound by two sureties to the sum of 200s. The Petition of Right herebefore described was passed as a statute in 1627. A special virtue of its position was that it could handle without fear matters in which men of social or local influence might intimidate or overawe juries or even country justices. It disciplined a nobleman for drawing a sword on a lord hunting hare. Blackhall when he would not sell his lands and rights. He had the house of one pulled down. He and his wife and one child died there. The Star Chamber imprisoned the knight and his men. The knight also had to pay one witness 100 pounds in reparation to the surviving children of the family whose house had been pulled down. But the power of the Star Chamber was abused by King Charles I. The evidence was paltry. A lord who was accused of converting agricultural land to pasture was fined four thousand pounds. The lord was fined ten thousand pounds. A man who became sheriff of a county and had taken the oath which bound him to remain in the county was elected to Parliament and stood in opposition to the king on many matters. He was imprisoned for many years until he made a humble submission and had to pay a heavy fine. A Scottish minister circulated a book appealing to the Parliament to turn out the bishops and to resist its own dissolution by the King. He was against kneeling at the sacrament and denounced the Queen for her religion. He blamed the state for the death of citizens of a certain town by famine. It opined that Nero had attended plays and deserved to be murdered. Pyrnne meant them harm. The justices saw in the book an attempt to undermine authority. Others printed similar material. These prisoners were set free by the Long Parliament. Council in civil and criminal cases. Refusal to take the oath resulted in commitment for contempt of court. Many fled out of the country or went into hiding in it. He neglected bowing or kneeling on coming to his seat in church and preached against the Book of Sports. To this he replied that a parrot could be taught to repeat forms and an ape to imitate gestures. But his most serious offenses had to do with his utterances from the pulpit derogatory to the tenets and discipline of the church. He allegedly warned his people to beware of a relapse into popery. He was ordered to make submission and recantation both in court and in his church and to give bond for 200 pounds. Traske was imprisoned for at least eleven years for keeping Saturday as her sabbath. Many people were excommunicated and books censored for essentially political reasons. The Court of High Commission was abolished by the Long Parliament. Justices of the Peace attending. It was primarily a court of appeal from penal sentences. But it was also an administrative body to determine taxes and make appointments of officials and grant licenses for businesses. This increased the independence of the judiciary. The rack was used for the last time in 1640 before the Long Parliament met. It was used to torture a rioter before hanging. Cambridge University was Puritan in sympathy. This was the last time armor was used. The Parliamentarians wore orange scarves to distinguish themselves from their enemy. Puritan zealots with a Puritan code of behavior which included no drinking or swearing. He selected horsemen based on ability rather than social class. Cromwell dressed all his foot men in red with only the facings being regimental colors. The New Model Army had been assembled because there had been disagreement about policy among the members of Parliament who held commissions. Almost all members gave up their commissions. They nursed the wounded. Puritan and royalist newspapers printed the news at least once weekly. The Mayor and citizens of London were given authority in 1642 to fortify all highways leading to the city and levy a tax on inhabitants for this purpose. Parliament approved certain persons to set forth ships at their own expense to defend the realm in 1643. They had to repair any damage done to the contentment of the owners. Parliament and deserters of their ordinary places of residence. They demanded liberty of conscience to practice their own religion and their pay. Cromwell sided with the army and then became leader of the House of Commons. Charles dissembled in his negotiations with the army generals. He felt freed from his promises as soon as the pressure was removed. Cromwell gave up hope on negotiations with Charles when he intercepted a letter by Charles to his Queen decreeing the final doom of the army adherents in favor of the Scottish Presbyterians. King into Parliamentary meetings. Parishes had to give maintenance to maimed soldiers and provision for the livelihood to the wives and children of killed soldiers. Masters of apprentices who became soldiers had to take them back as apprentices without loss for their absence in defense of the Commonwealth. Masters who received considerable loss by the absence of their apprentices received reasonable satisfaction from the public stock. It was gradually extended to many goods. England and by foreign manufacturers on goods at the ports. Royalists were purged from Oxford and a group of Baconians moved into the university behind Parliamentary armies. The universities were freed from taxation. Cromwell led the country. He believed that military success was a reflection of divine favor and he regarded himself as one the few elect preordained for salvation. Charles I as due to his breaking of a contract with the people. Most people dressed in Puritan fashion. Wealth and prosperity steadily increased in spite of the civil wars. The Merchant Adventurers were incorporated again in 1643 to have a monopoly. The penalty for trading for one who was not free of the corporation was forfeiture of his goods. House of Commons abolished the monarchy and in 1649 the House of Lords. It made a new constitution. A sovereign may be a man or body of men as long as his or its authority is generally recognized. There must be a social contract among the citizenry to obey a certain sovereign. Hobbes thought that knowledge of the world came through experience and not reason alone. He regarded human societies as purely mechanical systems set in motion by human desires. He saw self interest as the mainspring of moral law. Conflicting self interests transformed into a lawful system of agreements. A third of the Senate would turn over every year. He also wrote in favor of liberty of the press. Ordinary speech found its way into prose writing. Many Royalists put their lands into trusts or turned them over to relatives or sold them outright to prevent confiscation. It was an upheaval comparable to the dissolution of the monasteries. But allowance was made for the maintenance of their wives and children. The Book of Common Prayer was abolished because of its burdensome ceremonies. It was replaced by a Directory for Public Worship. The ending of episcopal patronage gave some parishes the right to elect their own ministers. Sunday service were discontinued. This statute lasted for only five years from 1644 because observance of it was not consistent throughout the country. Educational opportunities such as in grammar schools were more widespread and stronger than ever before or since until the 1800s. About half the women in London were literate by 1700. Supper all ignorant and scandalous persons. He did not close the taverns or ale houses. In 1649 a corporation was established to teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ in New England to Indians. Corporation for the poor of London was established in 1647 with authority to erect workhouses and houses of correction. Imprisoned debtors who had less than five pounds and less that five pounds worth of trade tools and clothing and bedding for his family were ordered released in 1649. Wardship was abolished. Military tenures were abolished. Feudal tenures were converted into freehold in 1646. In 1653 those living in Crown forest land were given free socage in that land. Enclosure was no longer deterred especially after abolition of the Star Chamber. The oldest son inherited the land and the younger sons now received money. Clover seed was sold in London by 1650. It revolutionized the cultivation of barren land. England began to export instead of import grain. But vagrancy increased from people dispossessed of land. Employers and entrepreneurs were now free from control by the Crown. There were no more attempts to supervise quality of manufactures or to fix prices or regulate wages. There was greater freedom established in relations between employers and workers. The government no longer tried to compel employers to keep employees in times of economic slump. The requirement of seven year apprenticeships and being the son of a freeholder to be an apprentice were not enforced. There was more mobility of people. Taxation became regular and it was controlled by representatives of the taxpayers. Population growth gradually stabilized. Capitalism was coming into being. This cloth was sold at retail by the drapers. Cromwell reconstituted the East India Company on a wider and more permanent basis. This solved the problem of the competition of overlapping voyages which still occurred despite their terms of several years. Now the stock was never wound up. The Company had permanent capital which could grow. Company threw open the freedom of the Company to the public for a nominal sum of five pounds. Now the Merchant Adventurers and private traders could participate. His shares would then be resold. People began to buy and sell their shares among each other. The Company made the minimum subscription 100 pounds. Each person holding 500 pounds worth of shares had one vote. The continuity of capital took the place of the permanence of the governing body in providing stability. The Company established almshouses for its widows and orphans. Russia and established a New General Stock. An annual dividend was declared from the annual profits. Commercial men regularly kept accounts with bankers. Merchants used division to apportion profits or losses to the parties whose capital was involved. Simple and compound interest were used. The concept of contract became a familiar one. Regular private bankers of London emerged from the Goldsmiths from 1640 to 1675. They issued bank notes and paid checks. English ships were embellished with decoration. Their sail area was increased by triangular fore and aft sails. The Navy increased from 39 to 80 vessels. Brass was made from copper and zinc alloyed together. Strips of silver were passed between engraved rolls. Then coins were punched out and their edges serrated. There was a thermometer which used liquid such as water or alcohol in a glass tube instead of air. He worked with negative and fractional exponents. Around 1655 he invented the infinite arithmetic and introduced the symbol for infinity. He and lawyer and mathematician Pierre Fermat invented the theory of probabilities. He founded number theory. This work helped lay the foundation for analysis. He and German Gottfried Leibniz formulated the principle that an equation with two unknown quantities can represent a curve. There were many musical clubs. The violin became very popular. Solo songs were much sung. John Aubrey wrote anecdotes about famous men. People still read French romances translated into English. Dancing was still popular. Coffee houses came into prominence as places of social discourse. They were used for promenades and picnics. Ladies and their gallants rendezvoused there. Cromwell introduced the habit of port drinking to England. Post Offices was established with one Postmaster General for all of England. There was continual problem with Catholics. Papists and soldiers of fortune who had borne arms against Parliament were ordered to depart from within twenty miles of London and Westminster or be imprisoned as traitors. The Society of Friends was founded by the son of a weaver. Quakers because they trembled when religiously stirred. They hated ritual so much that they rejected baptism and communion. They did not observe the sabbath as a special day different from other days. They derided the holiness of churches. No clergy were admitted into their sect. Women were admitted to teach the brethren and were considered proper vehicles to convey the dictates of the spirit. The denied any clerical authority and all texts. They believed in the separation of church and state. They refused to take off their hats to anyone but God. It was their practice to turn the other cheek when one cheek had been struck. He never asked more for his wares than the precise sum which he was determined to accept. The Quakers developed a value of making provision for children from a first spouse when remarrying. They carefully selected masters and mistresses who wanted to take on child apprentices for their suitability for such responsibility. Sometimes they were thrown into mad house or prisons and sometimes whipped or pilloried. They endured stoically under this suffering. Mary Fisher from Yorkshire introduced Quakerism to New England. Cromwell had bad experiences with Parliaments. The Rump Parliament was a remnant of the Long Parliament. Cromwell came to doubt that it would ever give the people adequate government and protection. He started to believe that one man as chief executive could do this better. Cromwell dismissed the Rump Parliament in 1653. He was to administer the government and be the chief magistrate. Roman Catholics and adherents of the formerly established Church of England. Cromwell did not tolerate the ritual of the formerly established English church nor allow any of its adherents to have any office under him. His was a purely Puritan government. He did not sell offices. It clashed severely over the continuation of tithes to the church. It became disorderly when some declared the Parliament dissolved and left. Others remained in their seats. Cromwell had soldiers close the Parliament of Saints and lock its doors. The people supported this action because they were dissatisfied with the state of public affairs. Cromwell was distressed that this Parliament had also voted themselves to be the sole determinors of atheism and blasphemy instead of advancing liberty of religious conscience and religious toleration as Cromwell had advocated. A last Parliament was also dissolved by Cromwell for tending to loosen the bonds of government and thereby threatening the peace of the nation. He came to rule as a military dictator. Payment of taxes was enforced by distraint. The singing of ballads was banned. The Court of Chancery was reformed by proclamation. The established church was reformed and the power to interfere with different faiths was denied to it. No one was compelled to attend any particular church or to accept the discipline of any particular minister. But the Book of Common Prayer was forbidden. The only appeal was to the Protector. Dancing was discontinued. Organs and choirs in churches prohibited. Court masks continued because they provided soothing music. The Commons regained its old right of exclusively deciding on the qualification of its members. A fixed revenue was voted to the Protector. No moneys were to be raised except by consent of Parliament. Liberty of conscience was secured for all. The old constitution was restored and a new House of Commons was elected. Register Book of the Company of Stationers. Parliament or the Committee on Examinations for punishment. Justices of the peace and other officers may order doors and locks broken for this purpose. This law suppressed royalist newspapers but was enforced only with great difficulty. Altar and communion tables must not be raised but leveled. All organs must be taken away. The penalty for writing or preaching against the Directory for Public Worship is five to fifty pounds. Incest was also declared to be a felony. Fornication was given a punishment of three months imprisonment and until security was obtained for one year for good behavior. The second offense was felony without benefit of clergy. There was to be no corruption of the blood. There shall be no profane swearing or cursing of forfeit by a lord 30s. There is a double fine for the second offense. A person equating himself or another with God or not believing in God shall be imprisoned for six months without bail. Attainder for such would not work corruption of the blood. Treason to the Protector was defined the same as it was to the King. Army deserters are to be corporally punished or executed. This will be supervised by overseers appointed by Parliament. No one may import foreign hats or hatbands to relieve that industry in England. Butter for sale must not be corrupt and be properly weighed. One must obtain a license to buy wheat or other grain and put it to sale in meal or flour or forfeit three times the value. English or forfeit 20 pounds. Interest may not exceed 6 pounds for a loan of 100 pounds yearly as of 1651. None may be imported from Europe except in English ships or ships from the country of origin of the goods. No salt fish may be imported or exported but in English vessels. There is a 10 pound reward for discovery of highwaymen and burglars or persons who break and enter into houses and there use violence. No cart or wagon or carriage on the road may be drawn by more than five horses or six oxen and a horse except for military vehicles. Notice of intended marriages shall be published once a week for three weeks in a public meeting place called church or a public market place next to church. Exceptions to the marriage shall be noted by the Register and considered by the Justice of the Peace before the marriage is performed. Horse races were forbidden in 1654 for six months to discourage mischievous plots and designs by enemies of the state. The penalty was forfeiting the horse. Attendees were to be brought to justice. As of 1657 persons living extravagantly without visible estate or calling may be made by Justices of the Peace to acquire sureties for good behavior or go to gaol. They would also be sent to the house of correction to work for three months for the first offense and for a time specified by the Justice of the Peace for the second offense. Drunkenness was much punished. Parliament was no longer a court. Use of the torture was proscribed in 1649. Now civil justice was honestly dispensed and justices were learned and honest. It did not include contracts between merchants. The monarchy was restored and Charles II came to the throne. The episcopacy of the bishops and the Book of Common Prayer were restored. There were 160 peers for the next century. The Commons was composed mostly of royalist established church members. Baptists were returned by statute of Parliament. Baptists did not believe in an established church. Charles II was an easygoing and kindly man and hard to ruffle. He had a weariness in the folly of men and a cynical disbelief in human virtue. His wit and great sense of humor softened many a potentially tense situation. His restoration to the throne brought in a time of enjoyment of life in reaction to the Puritanism of before. Parliament was oriented toward royalty and the established church. He also sold many of the last crown lands. This was in part due to his generous maintenance of several successive mistresses and more than about a dozen illegitimate children. Charles went to plays regularly. Comedies were the preferred plays. Bad actors were hissed off the stage. Opera made music a vehicle for human emotions. The gentry sang to the lute and danced to string instruments. Many owned and played musical instruments. Humble people had folksongs and instruments like the pipe and tabor for dancing. Singing in parts was popular in town and country. In 1672 John Banister started the first regular series of public concerts in his house. Charles did much garden and park planning and let the public enjoy the royal St. He loved hunting too and had the royal forests replenished with deer after poaching during the Cromwell era had greatly reduced their numbers. Charles II introduced sailing and yacht racing for pleasure. He also participated in and promoted horse racing. The breeding of thoroughbred horses began with breeding to Arab mares. Gelding horses were now preferred over stallions. Ice skating with iron blades was popular. Italian puppet shows played in London. Dress returned to elaborateness. This could hide the short hair of a former Puritan Roundhead. Charles introduced a new mode of inexpensive court dress which was made entirely from English textiles. Stockings and shoes replaced the long fitted boots. Charles set a court tradition of men wearing a scarf tied around the neck. The shoulder line was low and the sleeves full and open at the front with fastenings of jeweled clasps. They kept their hands warm in muffs. The members of the House of Commons dressed like the gentry and assumed their manners. There was exaggeration in all complimentary and ceremonial language. They owned about half the land of the country. Freeholders of the lesser sort 5. Shopkeepers and tradesmen 4. Cottagers and paupers 3. Secret guests also used it. The closet room was the innermost sanctum for privacy and gave its name to the later cabinet of the government. There were fewer servants and they were of a lower social status than before. This change came about because the state now maintained reasonable law and order. The kitchen staff ate in the kitchen. The bulk of the servants slept in the basement or subordinate wings of the house. The chief official was the receiver general. These were checked by an auditor. The receiver general was often the son of a country gentleman and had a salary of 50 pounds raised to 100 pounds with longevity. He had a servant and an assistant. He was in close personal attendance upon the earl. His salary was 20 pounds a year. The lady had a gentlewoman with a maid servant. The receiver general supervised most of the staff. There was a steward of 40 pounds a year. He supervised a clerk of the kitchen and a house bailiff of 20 pounds a year. The steward was also responsible for the wine cellar. A dozen footmen belonged partly to the house and partly to the stables and received 2 to 6 pounds yearly. They waited on the lord and lady in the house and accompanied them in travels and did errands for them. Boy pages also worked partly in the house and partly in the stables. He had casual workers as needed to assist him. The steward was also responsible for the London house. The salaries for the family estate totaled about 600 pounds a year. Queen Mary encouraged the fashion of collecting Chinese porcelain. The rich had red or black and gilt lacquered cabinets and cupboards. There were grandfather clocks. Stuffing began to be upholstered to woodwork benches. Chairs were taller in the back. Ladies did needlework to cover them and also made patchwork quilts. Cane seats came into fashion. It was the last and worst plague since the Black Death of 1348. Church bells tolling their requiems clanged in ceaseless discord. At night groups of people shoveled the corpses into open graves. People took wild beliefs in hope of avoiding the plague. Other localities posted sentries on the road to keep Londoners out of their areas to prevent the plague from spreading there. God to bless a person who sneezed. There was a lot of noise from falling buildings. Panic and desperation were widespread. There was a lot of crying out and running about distractedly. The streets were full of carts piled high with furniture and merchandise. The Thames River was thick with heavily laden barges. Eventually the wind abated and the fire was put out. There was a general use of tile for roofing. They had to have wide brick walls around them to avoid the spread of fires. Main streets had to be wide enough to stop a fire. The street selling that had caused so much congestion was removed to new market places. Astronomer and geometrician Christopher Wren designed and built a new St. He worked up from a square base through all sorts of shapes to a circular double dome on top. The fire put an end to Whitehall as a royal residence and St. James Palace was used instead. But at least one fire hazard remained. That was the practice of lighting new fires by taking buckets of hot coals from one room or house to another. Nicholas Barbon began fire insurance in the 1670s. Aristocrats bought large parcels of land on which they built their own mansions surrounded by lots to be rented to building contractors and speculators like Barbon. The houses built on these lots were sold and the underlying land rented. Barbon built rows of identical townhouses. Most of the new building was beyond the old City walls. London was residential and commercial. Around the outside were tenements of the poor. The first directory of addresses in London was published in 1677. Business began to follow the clock more strictly and many people thought of their watches as a necessity. Notices and letters of general interest were posted therein. Edward Lloyd who established it for this purpose in 1687. Lloyd provided reliable shipping news with a network of correspondents in the principal ports at home and on the continent and circulated a handwritten sheet of lists of vessels and their latest movements at his coffeehouse. The patrons cheered safe arrivals and shared their grief over ships lost. They insured their own risks at one moment and underwrote those of their friends the next. Auctions of goods and of ships and ship materials which had been advertised in the newspapers were conducted from a pulpit in the coffeehouse. French wine was consumed less because of heavy taxation and spirits and beer were consumed more. But this provoked such an uproar that it was reduced to a responsibility of the owner to prevent scandalous papers and libels from being read and hindering any declarations any false and scandalous reports against the government or its ministers. London air was filthy with smoke from coal burning. In 1684 the streets were lit with improved lights which combined oil lamps with lenses and reflectors. In 1694 a monopoly was sold to one lighting company. In 1663 a body of paid watchmen was established in London. This was to supplement the unpaid Justices of the Peace. Pickpockets would be drenched under a pump. Cheats would be beaten up. Dishonest shops and brothels would be ransacked or destroyed. The most common targets were promiscuous women and pregnant servants. There were many highway robberies and mob actions in London. The manufacture of silk material had been brought to England by French workers driven from France. London silk weavers demonstrated outside the Commons and East India House against the importation of raw silks by the East India Co. Indian silks and wearing of Indian silks was prohibited by statute. Sometimes mobs would break open the prisons to release fellow rioters or take action against strike breakers or informers. Parish constables elected by their neighbors could not control the mobs and stayed within their parishes. It compensated those with encroachments of over 30 years. It assessed inhabitants of such streets 16d. Women continued to empty their pails and pans outside their doors and did their washing on stools in the streets. There was a penalty of 5d. So there was a return to the former system of requiring citizens to sweep and clean the streets in front of their buildings twice a week and keep the filth until a scavenger or raker came. The penalty for not doing so was 3s. There was a fine of 20s. One way that people traveled was to be carried in sedan chairs held up by two horizontal poles with one man at the front ends and another man in back. There were so many sedan chairs and coaches for hire in London that the watermen lost business. Their maximum rate was 10s. Licensed coachmen were not allowed to practice any other trade. The coaches paid the commission 5 pounds yearly. Hay sold along the road brought 6d. There had to by paid 3d. Fields that would have been left fallow were planted with new crops which restored indispensable chemical elements to the soil. The size and weight of animals for slaughter grew. The demand for food in London and other urban areas made enclosure for crop cultivation even more profitable than for sheep grazing. The government made no more attempts to curtail the enclosure of farm lands. The number of enclosures grew because copyholders were not successful in obtaining the legal security of tenure. But most land was not enclosed. Wives participated with their husbands in general agricultural chores and did the dairy work including making cheese. Imported sugar enabled fruit to be preserved as jam in jars sealed with a layer of mutton fat to make them airtight. She was likely to concoct medications from her herbs. Meat had to be smoked or salted when there was not enough fodder to keep animals alive through the winter. She saw to it that the soap was boiled and the candles molded. Women had less work and lower pay than men. Discipline was by whipping. Children were treated as little adults. It was formed from a discussion group of the new experimental philosophy. Gresham professors of geometry and astronomy. The Royal Society met at Gresham College. Its goal was to compare ideas in mathematics and science and identify specific aims of science. Charles himself had his own laboratory and dabbled in chemistry and anatomy. Similar societies were formed all over the world. Theologicians warned that scientific research was dangerous. He came from a family which had risen from the yeomen ranks to the gentry. He did this using a prism to dissect the white light into its spectrum of constituent colors and then using a prism and lens to recombine the colors to reconstitute white light. The spectrum was the same as that of a rainbow. He approximated the speed of sound. Newton opined that an object moves because of external forces on it rather than by forces internal to the object. B also exerts a force on A which is equal in amount but opposite in direction. Newton had a radically novel idea that equated instantaneous acceleration to the gravity force which provoked it. He theorized that the same gravity force that pulled an apple down from a tree extended out to the moon hold it in its orbit around the earth. He carried mathematization of data from experiments as far as possible. His law of gravitation explains how the whole universe is held together. This law holds that every object in the universe attracts every other object with a single gravitational force that is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between their centers. Newton had first believed in the Cartesian system of celestial vortices of aether than swirled the planets and comets around their orbits. The gross features of the universe led to his recognition that the attraction between two bodies decreased inversely to the square of the distance between them. Then he formulated the idea that the ultimate agent of nature was a force acting between bodies rather than a moving body itself. It had been thought that invisible angels moved the planets. He demonstrated from data collected from the comet of 1680 that comets moved according to his law of gravitation. He used the concept of a common center of gravity as a reference point for other motions. The fact that the center of gravity of the solar system was within the body of the sun verified that the sun was indeed at the center of it. The church denounced it as being against the scripture of the Bible. He had his own interpretations of the Bible and doubted the divinity of Jesus. But it was accepted for dissenters like Newton to qualify for full civil rights by maintaining an outward conformity and taking the sacrament in the established church once a year. Newton was given a royal dispensation from taking holy orders as prescribed by the rules for tenure of fellows of his college at Cambridge University. He did believe in a God who created the universe and who had a ubiquitous presence in all space. Newton was active in the opposition that defeated this attempt. Jupiter was nearest to the earth and a few minutes behind time when Jupiter was farthest from the earth. Jupiter was from the earth because it took their light longer to reach the earth. It states that all points of a wave front of light in a vacuum may be regarded as new sources of wavelets that expand in every direction at a rate depending on their velocities. He used a pump he developed and a glass jar to create a confined air space for experiments. He opined that animals were dependent upon a fresh supply of air to live. He proved by experiment that the volume of a gas at a constant temperature varies inversely to the pressure applied to the gas. Oxford was denounced by the Oxford clergy as destroying religion. Boyle build his air pump. He was a genius with innate mechanical skill. He applied a spiral spring to regulate the balance of watches. A lord financed him as a Gresham lecturer for 50 pounds a year. He formulated the theory that light is composed of pulses. Law states that the amount an elastic body bends or stretches out of shape is in direct proportion to the force acting on it. He constructed an arithmetical machine. Hooke had thousands of pounds stored in an iron chest. Wallis wrote a treatise on algebra which was historical as well as practical. He showed that the stars change in position in relation to each other. Greenwich Observatory was built in 1675. Halley used a barometer to measure the density of the atmosphere and related its readings to elevations into the atmosphere and to weather. He illustrated the tropical winds with the first meteorological map. Halley surveyed the tides and coasts of the British Channel for the king in 1701. He wrote a dictionary of pharmaceuticals. John Ray and Francis Willughby were friends who traveled together to study plants and animals respectively. Ray compared anatomies and experimented on movements of plants and the ascent of sap. He knew what fossils were. Ray first suggested the concept of species in classification of animals and plants. The vast array and dispersal of animals found by world explorers all over the world cast doubt on the biblical story of Noah putting two of every kind of animal on an ark. He thought it to be a Druid temple. He was the first to observe the existence of sex in plants. He correctly described human blood cells. This started the science of bacteriology. The cellular basis of life was discovered. Human blood vessels were examined. Excess urine had been associated with a wasting disease. Willis identified diabetes mellitus with excess of urine with sweetness. He also furthered clinical medicine by emphasizing detailed observations of patients and maintaining accurate records. He wrote a treatise on gout and identified scarlet fever. He introduced a cooling method of treating smallpox. It was common for people who felt ill to take a laxative and rest at home. Bath for treatment for disease. There was more bathing because private homes in towns now had indoor baths. The public baths came into disuse. Most physicians used talismen such as the eagle stone at deliveries. Caesarian section almost always led to the death of the mother. Midwives were licensed by the church and could baptize babies. Women over thirty had fewer children and the last child born was at an earlier age than before. This idea which was first adopted by revolutionists and then became accepted as orthodoxy. He theorized that men turn to forming a civil government when there is a need to protect accumulated property. John Locke theorized that propositions have probability rather than certainty. He was a great admirer and friend of Newton and they shared religious views. There were no more disputations to qualify for degrees. They were known as the gentlemen commoner students. The few poor students were known as servitors and paid for their education by menial work. Corporal punishment ceased. Fellows of colleges had common rooms for drinking and smoking together as they had done in taverns outside college walls. The two universities were vested with the presentation of benefices that had belonged to Papists. A few dissenting schools were established. Fountain pens came into use. There were many political biographies. Thomas Hyde wrote on ancient Persian religion. He compared the ancient Greek life with modern life. He also confuted atheism on the Newtonian system. Frenchman Richard Simon identified the old testament as history instead of divine revelation. The poem deals with the puritan struggling against evil and the problem of sin and redemption. It has a cold and severe conception of moral virtue and stoical self repression in its characters. There is no sympathy with the human condition. Everlasting City of heaven and on the way meets people who try to harm him. But he derives strength from his adversities. The journey is a metaphor for the Christian soul trying to find salvation. It is Puritan in its sympathies and has insights into human nature. William Congreve wrote plays such as a comedy on manners. John Vanbrugh wrote plays satirizing London high society and social institutions. In it every creature had a body and a spirit. Mary Astell proposed a college for women. Some women painted portraits. There were rigid censorship acts from 1662 to 1695. Books could be imported only into London and not sold until approved by the Archbishop of Canterbury or Bishop of London after being opened and viewed by a scholar appointed by these bishops and a representative of the Company of Stationers. No one could print or import copies of any books without consent of the owner with right by letters patent. The penalty for not doing so was to forfeit 6s. Printers had to set their own name to the books they printed and also the name of the author or forfeit such book. Only freemen of London who were members of the Company of Stationers could sell books. They could search houses of persons of other trades only by special warrant. Justices could imprison offenders. The only newspapers to appear between 1660 and 1679 were official government sheets. I know not why a man should not have liberty to print whatever he would speak and to be answerable for the one just as he is for the other. In 1702 the first daily newspaper in the world came into existence in England. Company monopoly of printing also ended in 1695. Printing was not regulated and no longer criminal just because it was unauthorized. The rich got richer and the poor got poorer. Many successful merchants and manufacturers bought landed estates and established a line of country squires or baronets or even peers. The fashion started in the nobility and the richest mercantile families that their wives should become ladies of leisure. In periods of economic crisis industrial workers lost their jobs. Much work was seasonal. Anyone who could work most of the time was fortunate. The poor rate collected for the cottagers and paupers was 3d. There was an agricultural depression that was deepest in the 1680s after the collapse of a boom. It was the only bad depression experienced in peace time. There was famine in 1698. Many went from parish to parish to build cottages and consumed all the wood there and then went to another parish. So the parishes were allowed by statute to remove any person coming to settle in any tenement under the value of ten pounds who was likely to be chargeable to it. They were then removed to the last parish were they had resided for at least forty days. Excepted were people temporarily moving to another parish to work at harvest time. The overall effect was to decrease the mobility of people. But a later statute permitted greater movement of poor people by allowing those who were poor for want of work to go to another parish where labor was wanted. Parish poor houses were converted into spinning schools to obtain an income. No parish was rated at more than 6d. Assessments were made for building and repairing gaols in order to maintain the health and safe custody of the prisoners. London lands were taxed for the relief of orphans. Churchwardens could seize the goods and chattels of putative fathers and mothers deserting bastard children. Societies for the Reformation of Manners prosecuted poor people for moral offenses. All hackney coaches and stage coaches in all the realm became required to be licensed. The turnpike system came into use. Tolls were paid for road upkeep and repair by private companies. The local parishes ceased to have this responsibility. John Ogilby wrote the first road book based on actual surveys of the roads. The trip from London to Oxford was twelve hours. The company of Coach and Coach Harness Makers was founded with the consent of the king. The body of a coach hung from the frame by leather braces. One axle pivoted for turns. Plate glass was used in the windows. One sheet letter going less than 80 miles cost 2d. Parishes were required to provide for poor and maimed officers and soldiers who served Charles I or Charles II. The Royal Hospital founded by Charles as a home for veteran soldiers opened in 1692. Colonels were the proprietors of their regiments and captains were the proprietors of their companies. So pikemen with their long spears became obsolete. Hand grenades and small explosive bombs came into use about 1670. Explosives were also used in mines. There was resort to many devices to fund wars. The land tax was still the primary tax. The customs and excise taxes were often extended to more goods and wares. Commissioners were appointed to take and state the account of all money in the public revenue. This discouraged the prevalent corruption of government officials and thereby the people were encouraged to pay their taxes. The Goldsmiths loaned money to the king and to private persons and to the Exchequer. Receipts from Goldsmiths for storage in strong boxes had become a de facto paper currency. Bank of England was founded in 1694 under whig auspices to provide money for war. It was the first institution to issue notes in excess of its total deposits. Crown without the consent of Parliament. Not many corporations were original subscribers. Crown and occasionally to corporations. Money was also borrowed by offering annuities on single lives. Also in that year was the first run on the bank. Mint had not supplied the Bank with sufficient supplies. Interest instead of cash was given for notes. Cash was short for months. It was then given a monopoly so that its notes would not have competition. Exchequer and circulated by the Bank of England. They were frequently endorsed many times by successive holders. The check paper was unique to the Bank and embellished with distinctive scroll work to serve as an obstacle to fraud. Over time the running cash note tended to be for round sums of at least twenty pounds and multiples of five pounds. The Bank of England had a monopoly on issuing notes in the London area. The Bank of England gave to its depositors the service of paying annually to a designee without further order. Shareholders were no longer personally liable for company losses. Interest on loans was no longer considered sinful as long as it was not oppressive. The greater ability to borrow spurred the growth of capitalism. This is to avoid the collusion of fixing values to their own advantage. The science of statistics made life insurance possible. But it was administered by ad hoc offices rather than companies and was not reliable in making payments. Charles instituted a hearth tax of 2s. Charles built up a body of support in Parliament which could be relied upon for a majority. Irish Catholic bandits. The tory and whig groups were known by their disagreement over the authoritarianism of the Crown. The tories were sympathetic to the doctrine of divine right and favored a doctrinally high church. Many royalists became tories. The whigs refused to accept the sacrosanct character of the monarchy. The whigs opined that government depended upon consent of the people and that the people had a right of resistance. They subordinated the Crown to Parliament. Many former Puritans became whigs. Scots Presbyterian rebels and horse thieves. The gout and venereal disease were common among political leaders. It was uncomfortable and unreliable. Treasury as a supreme financial body separated from the Exchequer as a depository of revenue. A gold guinea coin was issued. Privy Council and answerable to the secretary of state. Charles compelled some of the livery companies in London to give up their charters to him and he called in many corporation charters of boroughs whenever some light excuse could be found to justify it. This was done by the use of the writ of quo warranto before a court. In London he had the tory mayor revive an ancient custom of selecting a sheriff by drinking to him at the annual feast. Two tory sheriffs were installed into office. Royal commissioners would then determine who the officers would be. Parliament by Crown loyalists as London had been whig. It also allowed influenced selection of sympathetic jurors. Benjamin Keach was tried for writing a book containing contradictions of the doctrine of the established church. He wrote against infant baptism and asserted that laymen might preach the gospel. The justice intimidated the jury to find him guilty. He was to be imprisoned until he found sureties for his good behavior and renunciation of his doctrine and for his future appearance in court. Juries were loath to find anyone guilty of seditious libel. James II succeeded Charles II to the throne and fostered Roman Catholicism by appointments and by attempting to suspend laws unfavorable to Catholics. He commanded all bishops to read in the churches his Declaration of Indulgence exempting both Catholic and Protestant dissenters from all penal statutes based on religion. He prosecuted them for seditious libel in the petition. The jury found them not guilty. James discharged the two justices of the five who had rejected the seditious libel doctrine which had been created by the Star Chamber Court. This roused the whigs and tories in turn to discharge him by joining in inviting protestants William of Orange and Mary to take the throne in his place. The king may not suspend laws or dispense with them without consent of Parliament. The establishment of a Court of Commissioners and like bodies for ecclesiastical causes is illegal. The king may not levy money or extend an authorized levy without consent of Parliament. Subjects have a right to petition the king without prosecution. The king may not raise or keep a standing army within the country in time of peace without the consent of Parliament. Protestants may have arms for their defense as allowed by law. The elections of members of Parliament should be free. The freedom of speech or debates or proceedings in Parliament should not be impeached or questioned in any court or place outside of Parliament. All Protestants may freely exercise their religion and the king will maintain the Protestant religion and the law and liberty of the realm. There was no divine right or hereditary right to the Crown. An English monarch was created by an act of Parliament. Parliament continued for six months after the death of a king. Parliament sat every year. Bench felony conviction of Sir John Elliot. All resolutions by the Privy Council had to be signed by the members consenting to them. Justices served during good behavior instead of at the pleasure of the king. Tories tended to accept of the Whig principles of limited constitutional monarchy instead of rule by divine right. Commons and then removed by the Parliament. The Commons removed anyone who disagreed with them as soon as he made a mistake. But the king could pardon anyone convicted by Parliamentary bill of attainder. Thus Parliament gained control of who would be ministers. The largest pottery workshops employed about six men. New companies could be formed without royal or Parliamentary consent. There were no more commercial monopolies. Regulated companies declined. Their method of limiting the volume of their exports of English cloth to Germany to keep up prices was obsolete. Now they tried to capture the market by selling cheap. The Stock Exchange was incorporated about 1694. Some farmers became spinners in the winter when outside work was impossible. The manufacture of nails was also done by this system. Only a quarter of 200 towns had any organized guilds at all. The guild and apprentice regulations were effectively enforced only in agriculture. Artisans became known as tradesmen. Some merchant clothiers also owned a fulling mill and a shop where it was sold. But production was still confined to the known wants of its habitual market. Men used to working at home were generally not inclined to go to work in a factory. Vauxhall glass works were opened with workmen brought from Venice to blow their fine glass and make mirrors. Smiths used trip hammers powered by water mills which turned an axle with cams on it. Cast iron was made by running liquefied metal into molds. This was harder but more brittle than the tough but malleable wrought iron. Tinkers went from house to house to repair metal items such as pots and pans. Salt and glass manufacture expanded. Glass drinking vessels were in common use. Mirrors of blown plate glass were manufactured in England. Some plate glass by casting was imported. The East India Company had about half the trade of the nation. Its shares were frequently bought and sold. English subjects below the age of forty to live in its Indian settlements and to trade practically everywhere. India became subject to the East India Company. The Company always paid high dividends and the market price of its shares generally rose. In 1693 a new charter for the Company included loss of monopoly status by resolution of the Commons. Thereafter the Commons regulated trade with India and determined who could participate in trade there. The trade opened up to many more traders and investors. Ordinary investors came to include women and Quakers. This was to achieve a favorable balance of trade. It also restricted the export of raw wool. England led the way in protectionist measures. Cloth and manufactures were exported to America. Dyeing and dressing of cloth became the norm and undressed cloth exports fell sharply. Tonnage of English shipping doubled by 1688. Parliament asserted a supremacy of Parliament over the church. Protestant religion established by law. England competed with other nations for land in the New World. New Jersey to England in 1667. Presbyterians and Baptists fled from religious tests and persecutions in England to colonize New Jersey. The king had granted proprietary rights to this land to him to discharge a Crown debt to his father. Pennsylvania and Delaware in 1682. New York was made a royal province in 1691. Bay Company was incorporated to engage in fur trade with Indian trappers in the Hudson Bay and to find a northwest passage to China. Increase Mather and his son Cotton Mather were Puritan ministers in Boston. Increase was for a time the President of Harvard College and participated in obtaining the new charter of Massachusetts of 1691. Baptists became influential also. They were then hanged and their property confiscated. One man endured being pressed to death for refusal to plead so that his property would be inherited by his family rather than confiscated. Then the more thoughtful people began to doubt the whole phenomenon and admitted error. The excommunications were revoked. He encouraged Puritanism into a simpler piety and charity. Any sale of land or lease or estate of freehold or copyhold shall be in writing and signed. An interest in land given orally shall have only the force of estates at will. All contracts for sale of goods or merchandise for the price of at least 10 pounds shall be in writing and signed by the parties or shall be accompanied by part payment or partial acceptance of the goods. This is to deter fraud. Mortgagees can hold the land of any mortgagor who borrows money upon security of the land or obtains another mortgage without prior notice to the initial mortgagee. The mortgagor has six months to pay off the mortgage and all interest and charges or vacate the land and lose his equity therein. This is to avoid wasting of land lying uncultivated and unmanured. London and York shall not be affected. Administrators have to make an inventory. They have to account on request by an interested person. They must be bonded by two sureties. Executors and administrators of estates of deceased persons must pay the debts of the deceased person rather than waste or convert the goods and chattels to their own use. Creditors may recover their debts from heirs or devisees of the will of a debtor. No one may take more than 6 pounds in interest for a 100 pound loan. Creditors not wanting them released had to contribute to their maintenance in gaol. The making or selling of fireworks is forbidden or forfeit 5 pounds. This is to avoid the loss of life and of eyes. Traitors shall suffer death and forfeiture as in high treason. American colonies for seven years. Butter sold must be of one sort and not contain bad butter mixed in with good butter. Butter pots must bear the name or mark of their potter. Fishermen may sell their fish to others than Fishmongers at Billingsgate fish market because the Fishmongers have forestalled the market and set their own prices. Fishmongers may sell in shops or houses. Winders or doublers who purloin or embezzle and sell silk from the thrower who employs him and the buyer of such silk shall make such recompense as ordered by a Justice of the Peace or be whipped or set in the stocks for the first offence. The regulation of the Silk Throwers company restricting the number of spindles to be worked at one time is voided because it has taken livelihoods away and caused foreign thrown silk to be imported. No button may be made of cloth or wood. No tobacco maybe grown in England because the colonies would be discouraged from growing it and the king would not receive customs from it. No manufacture of Europe may be imported into any colony or territory except shipped from England in English ships manned by Englishmen. These navigation acts were strictly enforced. Gamekeepers authorized by Justices of the Peace may search houses and outhouses and seize unlawful hunting equipment. Any person who apprehends and prosecutes such person is discharged from parish and ward offices. An offender being out of prison who informs against two other offenders who are convicted is to be pardoned. Any person convicted of theft or larceny and having benefit of clergy is to be burnt in the cheek nearest the nose instead of on the hand. Seamen do not have to perform service in the Army. Pirates may be punished by death and loss of all lands and chattels. Officers and seamen killed or wounded in the defense of a ship or who seize or destroy pirates may be paid by the owners an amount up to 2 pounds per 100 pounds of freight as determined by a group of disinterested merchants and the judge. The amount due to a man killed will be paid to his widow and children. This is to be done when the ship arrives in port. Masters forcing any man fit to travel to stay or shore or willfully leaves him behind shall suffer three months in prison without bail. He shall be imprisoned until he pays the 500 pounds. No hammered coins are lawful. This was extended to the colonies in 1696. But the lower rank of men were slow to give this up. A wife could have the security of the peace against her husband. He could restrain her liberty only for gross misbehavior. There were many variations in religious practices for statutes to address. The Quakers and Baptists were opposed to any state church. The Independents and Presbyterians accepted the idea of a state church. The members of the established church and Roman Catholics adhered to the state church as it had been for them in the past. Atheism had a bad reputation. Jews established the first synagogue in London. The Privy Council recognized their religious status as long as they were peaceful and obeyed the laws. A great number of people refused to come to their parish church or other public place where common prayer and sacraments were administered and the word of God was preached according to the established church. So factions and schisms developed. Book of Common Prayer and its prayers were required by statute in 1662 to be read by some priest or deacon in all the churches and places of public worship wherever and whenever there was any preaching or lecturing. Persons not frequenting the established church were not allowed to teach in any public or private school or forfeit 40 pounds. Church of England at which there are at least five persons present shall be fined 5s. This does not include members of the same household meeting in their home. The householder who permits such a meeting shall pay 20 pounds. A justice or Justice of the Peace or chief magistrate may break open doors and enter by force any house or other place where they have been informed of any such meeting and take persons there into custody for prosecution. This is to discourage the growing of dangerous seditious persons under pretence of tender consciences. Religious nonconformity continued especially among the humble people. The penal statutes caused hundreds of these nonconformists to be put in gaol. Charles II allowed dissenters to meet in private for worship if they got a license from him. Dissenters were then allowed by statute to meet behind locked or barred doors. But they had to pay tithes and could be prosecuted in the ecclesiastical courts for not doing so. Disturbers of religious worship were required to find two sureties for the amount of 50 pounds. Attendance at the established Church of England was never again required. Nor was preaching or lecturing constrained. Every person shall be pious and exercise religion publicly and privately on Sunday. No work may be done or goods sold or forfeit 5s. Protestant dissenters meeting behind locked doors. But payment of tithes and performance of parish duties were still obligatory. Elizabethan statute and the statute on uniformity of prayers and sacraments of Charles II. Quakers were active in the countryside. They were about one tenth of the population and did not believe in a state church. There were some Quakers schools and some Quaker workhouses to give work to the poor. The third offence required abjuring the realm or being transported to a plantation of the king beyond the seas. But this policy was only partially adopted in the country. Quakers were allowed to affirm or declare instead of making the customary oath. Catholicism was always disfavored. Catholic priests were executed with little evidence. Charles commuted the death penalty for them to banishment. Sometimes there were effigies of the pope burned in the streets. Such burnings were later banned. At times Charles allowed Catholics to attend mass. Church of England or be incapable of office. This is to prevent dangers from Papists. Papists were made to pay higher taxes. But Papists had to pay 5s. Persons and corporations having land worth at least 20s. But Papists and aliens had to pay 8s. King James II was Catholic and gave many offices to Catholics. This prompted a reaction against Papism and more statutes restricting them. All Papists had to forfeit their arms and any horse worth more than 5 pounds. Papists who kept a school or tried to educate the young were threatened with perpetual imprisonment. Popish parents were prohibited from forcing their children inclined towards Protestantism to become Catholic by refusing them suitable maintenance. Church of England could conduct meetings for worship. Thereafter the English jury had full independence to decide to verdicts. They could have a copy of the panel of jurors at least two days before trial. They could be represented in their defense by not more than two counsel learned in the law and assigned by the court. Their counsel had free access to them at all reasonable hours. They could make proof through lawful witnesses under oath. Parliament determined the outcome by a majority vote. This increase in the quality of the jury enabled it to better discern the issues in dispute. Jury sympathy was determined by the sheriff who chose the jury. Issues of bastardy or lawfulness of marriage had to be tried by a jury. The latter supplements bad words punished by the local courts and defamation punished by the church courts. Trover becomes the normal mode of trying the title to moveable goods as the courts oblige the defendant to answer the charge of conversion without permitting him to dispute the loss and finding. A to pay him the said sum of money when he the said X should be thereto afterwards requested. The rigid writs with specific forms of action for common law cases start to fall into disuse. Persons in prison on suspicion of treason could not be released on bail as of 1688. A person found guilty of malicious prosecution recovered his costs from his accuser. Mercantile cases were decided in light of mercantile custom rather than according to the strict rules of the common law. Commonwealth and Protectorate were confirmed subject to a right of appeal. Parliament assumed its control of the press. No longer could the Privy Council influence criminal cases and the general supervision of legal processes through the Star Chamber. They accepted subordination to the common law courts. Justices of the Peace. They had virtually no authority over laymen. Justices of the Peace took on more jurisdiction. Charles II and James II frequently dismissed justices not favorably disposed to the Crown. Parliament and a tenure to last during good behavior. They could be removed only by the address of both Houses of Parliament. This gave them independence from the king. Their tenure lasted for the life of the monarch. The chief justice could empower persons by commission to take affidavits from people in the country for court proceedings in Westminster. Judgments were docketed so they could easily be found e. Court judgments and fines could be challenged for error only within twenty years. Court decisions were still appealable to the House of Lords. House of Lords acquired the new judicial function of hearing appeals from the Chancery Court by virtue of the case of Shirley vs. Any gaol keeper allowing a prisoner to escape in return for money lost his office forever and had to forfeit 500 pounds. The last burning of the occasional burnings of a woman as a penalty for an offense was in 1688. The pillory was still in use. They still served at the pleasure of the king. Dress was plainer than before. Some shoes had metal buckles. Gold fobs with watches or seals hung from the breeches pocket. A slender sword was worn on the side. Sometimes feathers and cork were also used. There were new colors and cuts of dress for every season. Gentlemen often had valets to help them dress. The waistline fashion fluctuated high and low and in tightness. Some put jewels in their hair and had high elaborate hats with wide brims tilted forward. Hair was in ringlets at the side or dressed close to the head with a small top knot covered with a laced cap. Hooded cloaks were used outdoors and hoods were used for sun or wind. They carried leather purses with gloves at elbow length. Some had false teeth of bone or ivory wired into place. Both men and women sniffed tobacco snuff but only men smoked. Straw hats were worn in the summer. Night gowns and night caps were worn to bed. They were made of waxed silk or taffeta. All but the poorest wore silk and lace. The highest class were the peers and peeresses of the House of Lords and their spouses and families. Some were lawyers or merchants. There was much intermarriage among these families. The richest people in London were international merchants. The next class were the gentry. Their family heads had land and were often Justices of the Peace. They were sometimes members of the House of Commons. They usually lived in mansions. The old yeoman class was disappearing due to their selling their land to larger landowners. Farming on a large scale was more productive. The town people lived in town houses of two stories plus an attic. The last class were the manual workers. These people also worked in the harvesting of grain. Some consolidation of work was starting. Many women and children were so employed. It was not unusual for a man to work 13 hours a day for 6 days a week. The wage earners were well above the subsistence level as long as trade was good. Working men could now afford leather shoes and white bread. Newcastle miners earned 15s. Sheffield cutlers 13s. Rotherham blacksmith 13s. Witney blanket weaver or a Wilton carpet weaver 11s. Leeds cloth weaver about 8s. Wages of industry were higher than those of agriculture. In good times they had just enough to feed themselves. The gap between rich and poor became greater. Marriage remained a main way to wealth. But there was less social mobility than in the previous century and many landed families were consolidating their position. They expected their oldest son to take and preserve the family estate. Anglican landowning society. They ate with the family and did not consider themselves servants. Servants were kept more at a distance. By the 1750s the servant class was clearly defined. Their quarters were moved to the basement of the house and they ate together in the kitchen. In 1767 about one tenth of the population in London had servants. Even bricklayers and milk sellers had a servant. Most families had just one servant. Most wives employed some other woman or child to help in washing and scouring or in the minding of the children. London had grown beyond the locations of its walls around the City. On the east of the City was the port and industry. Park and was residential. In 1710 it was still possible to shoot woodcock in Regent Street. Westminster Bridge was opened. City walls were taken down to ease congestion. On the first floor was a front hall or parlor and a back parlor. They were upholstered with damask or needlework. Imported mahogany was replacing as a favorite the walnut that was usually used instead of oak. Much wood was inlaid with a variety of woods. Chippendale was available. His genius was in combining various motifs into one harmonious design. Cabriole legs with claw and ball feet came into fashion with Queen Anne about 1712. Between windows were tall mirrors. There were pictures on the walls. The fireplace had an elaborate mantel. The fire was kept going all day. The firewood was placed on andirons. Fire grates were used from about 1712. At a corner of the building was added a closet. They came from the pottery factory at Staffordshire founded by potter Josiah Wedgwood in 1769. On the third floor were bedrooms and a nursery. Children and servants slept on low wooden bedsteads. There was a wood staircase for the family and a back staircase for the servants. The floors and staircases were protected with carpeting. Servants had no right to free time or to holidays. The kitchen was in the basement or in a covered shed in the back. It had an open fire and a tin oven. There was a wash shed in back. Water pumped from the Thames into underground pipes was thus distributed to householders three times a week. Water carriers were still employed at set fees. Water was kept in lead cisterns. The wealthy had basement cisterns filled by a commercial company. The free public conduits of water were out of use by 1750. The front door of the house had two strong bolts on the inside and a heavy chain. The windows could be shuttered and barred. There were sash windows with cords and brass pulleys. At the back of the house was a garden and perhaps a coach house or stables. Under it was a brick drain leading to a public sewer or to a cesspool. Smelly gases arose from it. Sometimes people gathered such waste up to sell to farmers returning home in an otherwise empty wagon. Its pans and overhead cisterns were made in pottery. They were supported by wood structures. There were better cements for building. Landscaping to reproduce an idealized country scene replaced formal gardens. Furniture and landscaped gardens were often done in a Chinese style. Foreign trees were imported. Many streets east of the City were named after the governing families whose estates were there. The standard for politeness here was high and gentlemen were expected to keep their tempers. This came about because impoliteness could easily lead to a quarrel and then a duel. The pistol was replacing the sword as the weapon of choice for duels. The love of one man for another was recognized as the highest and noblest of human passions. Men of fashion often engaged in wagers and gambling at their clubs and coffee houses. Gentlemen often had valets. Buckingham House was bought as a palace for the royal couple. Shoes were made to order and ready made. The latest chemical theories and the chemical explanation of dying brought about the invention of new colors and new processes in dying cloth. They learned their jobs by doing them. The skilled artisan who works at home and either makes goods for a master or sells to the trade verges into the shop keeping class. Those employed in domestic service were mostly young women who later married. In 1675 Josiah Wedgwood opened a showroom in London for his high quality pottery from Staffordshire. Coffee houses reflected the character of their neighborhoods. Some retained a supply of prostitutes. The Blue stocking Club was established by women who organized conversational parties with guests of intellect and wit. Plays containing thinly veiled satires on politicians were becoming popular. Some plays had crude and licentious material. Theaters still shared a close association with brothels. This shaped the development of drama in London for a century. Opera depicting an immoral society unable to master its bandits was written by John Gay as a powerful attack on a government which most of London hated. With its many ballads it became very popular. Thinks his trade as honest as mine. A thief your goods and plate. He steals your whole estate. The Thames was crowded with sailing boats and with a line of boats waiting to unload. Foreign and native ships lined the river banks in rows. Theft of cargo from docked ships was still a problem and pirates were still executed at low tide on gallows. Londoners went to the bridges across the Thames to breathe fresh air. The river was so polluted by the sewers by 1760 that all the swans and most of the fish had disappeared. A Mansion House was built for the Mayor in 1753. Elsewhere in the park were laid out walks and fountains. Gardens were now natural instead of formal. The streets were usually crowded with people and traffic. Many people traveled by sedan chair. Each trade had it own call. Workers by necessity lived near their place of work because there was no cheap transport and walking through the streets after dark was unpleasant and dangerous. Hours of work for most craftsmen was from 6 a. Tenancy was usually on a weekly basis because of the general uncertainty of life and trade. Homeless children slept on the streets. Some alehouses catered to criminals and prostitutes. English immigrants a year to London in the 1700s. They were mostly young people. London needed many immigrants because of its high death rate. But there were fist fights by common men which gathered crowds and occasioned betting. Watchmen and constables were often old and physically incapacitated. The watchmen were householders taking their turn. This duty of householders watching the streets had evolved from the ancient obligation of wards to provide men to guard the walls at night. But few wanted these jobs by which they could offend their neighbors. Many citizens paid a rate to be excused from watch and ward duty. Constables were often tavern keepers. Many riots were started when penal laws against the Catholics were repealed. There were political riots between Tories and Whigs. The use of parish workhouse children also was a cheap supply of labor which forced down the wages of the stocking knitters. In 1720 a statute banned wearing of calico after mobs tore calico garments off women. Parliament and persuaded it to ban foreign silk imports. This was the last major mob action. Bounty hunters made a lot of money catching offenders. They had to burn from sunset to sunrise. City to pay for all night lighting all year by hired lamplighters. Anyone breaking or damaging the lights of London would forfeit 40s. Bad areas of thieves and prostitutes and the slums east of the City were gradually being replaced by warehouses and offices. London Bridge was widened and the houses were cleared off it. There were lanes for carriages in the middle and for pedestrians on each side. Its arches were also widened. Lights were put on it to be lit all night. And watchmen were put on it for safety and protection of passengers. Flat stones were put in place of the pebbles on the roadway. This also made the streets more airy. The buildings were given numbered addresses and street names were placed on buildings. Loading and unloading could not exceed one hour. Nuisances like empty carts could be removed. Cranes used in warehouses had to be stored in unobtrusive places. One who drove on the foot pavement had to forfeit 10s. Wells were dug and pumps erected for watering the streets. Pavements were to be repaired on complaint. Dust boxes and dust holes were built and had to be used for refuse awaiting pickup by the raker or forfeit 10s. But house occupants were required to keep the sidewalk in front of their house clean or forfeit 2s. Their regulations were extended to Sundays. They had to be made of brick or stone. In the 1720s firefighters had to fill a tank on a wagon by hand with buckets. On top of the bucket was a hose that could spray water high. The Sun Insurance Company was incorporated for fire insurance in 1711. This is to prevent decay of the roads. The justices of London assessed rates and made regulations for carriage of goods. House of Correction for up to one month or be publicly whipped. The roads around London were neither very attractive nor very safe. Along them was land covered with water from drains and refuse and dung heaps. Hogs were kept in large numbers on the outskirts and fed on the garbage of the town. Smoking brick kilns surrounded a great part of London. The rich also had coffee and chocolate. The morning newspaper was often read at breakfast. Roast meat was still the basic diet of town and country gentlemen. Many elaborate sauces were made. Beer was drunk by the poorer and middle classes. Dinner was in several courses and lasted a few hours. There was a chamber pot under the sideboard for their use. Politics was a popular subject. The women talked together in the drawing room. The nobility and gentry became more mobile and now mixed together at parties. Sometimes a man other than her husband escorted a lady to a party. Having lovers outside marriage was socially accepted if discrete. Weddings were becoming public in church instead of private. Brides wore a white silk or satin dress with a train. Over one third of brides who were capable of having children were already pregnant when they got married. Houses were warmed in winter by burning coal. Furniture was still sparse. The beds were warmed with a warming pan heated in a fire before use. There were often bed bugs and fleas. Everyone wore nightcaps to bed. Most towns had a regular market once or twice a week. Water was still obtained from wells and pumps. There was no municipal government as such. Large towns had hospitals for the poor. These put together libraries for use of their members. Some private citizens of various towns followed the example of London and obtained from Parliament the right to levy a house rate for paving and lighting. They had rectangular wood panes each with a sheet of glass cut from a circle of blown glass. The center of each pane of glass was thicker with a knot in the middle left from the blow pipe. In front of the house were railings which supported two lanterns at the doorway. Certain towns were famous for certain varieties of wool cloth. Shop keeping was supplanting fairs and markets. There the wife and children usually were busy carding and spinning. The main industry of the country was still agriculture. Enclosure of land was still going on. The enclosures were now done by statutory commissions to ensure equitable allotments. There were more horses than oxen in use now in the fields. Also invented was a threshing machine with a set of sticks to replace hand threshing with flails. Independent farming gave rise to the improvement of breeds of livestock by selective breeding. Enclosed land produced 26 bushels of grain compared to 18 bushels for common field land. Grain productivity was four times that of 1200. A fatted ox was 800 pounds compared to the former 400 pounds which it weighed from the 1300s to the 1600s. The fleece of sheep increased fourfold. Craftsmen still helped farmers at harvest time. Patience was required for those willing to wait for an existing cottage in a village to be vacated. Most laborers did not marry unless and until they found a cottage. Ancient custom that a person could build a home for himself on waste land if he did it in one night was ceasing to be respected. The children of laborers and of small farmers had little schooling because they were needed for work. Farm people relied on well water or rain water collected in lead cisterns. A farmhouse fireplace had pots hung from iron rods. Spits were rotated by pulleys powered by the upward current of hot air or by a mechanical device. Bacon was smoked in the chimney accessible by a staircase or upper floor. The people displaced by enclosure became laborers dependent on wages or paupers. They hang the man and flog the woman That steals a goose from off the common But leave the greater criminal loose That steals the common from the goose. Eventually there was some relief given to the poor workers. Elizabethan statute restricting locations where cottages could be erected and their inhabitants was repealed because the industrious poor were under great difficulties to procure habitations. Land could be rented out at ten times the original value. Great fortunes were made by large landowners who built grand country estates. The greatest industry after agriculture was cloth. More wool was made into cloth in the country. There were great advances in the technology of making cloth. He went to Italy to discover their secret in manufacturing silk so inexpensively. England hidden in pieces of silk. His factory was five hundred feet long and about five stories high. One water wheel worked the vast number of parts on the machines. Each man was in charge of sixty threads. There were three hundred workmen. There were many woolen manufacture towns. Clothiers might employ up to three thousand workers. John Kay invented a flying shuttle for weaving. It was fitted with small wheels and set in a kind of wooden groove. On either side there were two wooden hammers hung on horizontal rods to give the shuttle and to and fro action. At the end of each rod there was a spring to stop the hammer and replace it in position. Now the broadest cloth could be woven by one man instead of two. This shuttle was used in a machine for cotton. Now the price of thread rose because of increased demand for it. But the process of spinning was soon to catch up. This stretched the mass and drew it into any degree of fineness of thread by adjusting the speed of the second pair of rollers. Or the mass could be drawn by rotating spindles directly from one pair of rollers. This machine was worked by two donkeys and was tended by ten female workers. Carding was done by cylindrical carding machines invented by Lewis Paul. The machine consisted of a rectangular frame on four legs. At one end was a row of vertical spindles. No longer did it take ten spinners to keep one weaver busy. But manufacturers refused to pay him royalties for his invention. The courts held that the model of his jenny had been used in industry before it was patented and any rights he may have had were declared to have lapsed. The spinning jenny was used in many homes. He became a barber and made wigs. It produced a much stronger thread than could have been made with a spinning wheel. Then he turned his attention to weaving this thread. Great Britain because such was a branch of the ancient fustian manufacture. This was the way the wool weavers had expressed their opposition to imported printed cottons and calicoes. This was the first all cotton cloth made in England. Arkwright added machines to do work prefatory to spinning. Raw cotton was first fed by a sloping hose to a feeder that was perpetually revolving. From here it went a carding machine of three rollers of different diameters covered with bent metal teeth. He provided housing and services to attract workers. Silk and cotton manufacture led the way in using new machinery because they were recently imported industries so not bound down by tradition and legal restraint. Yarn production so improved that weavers became very prosperous. Cards with metal teeth were challenging the use of wood and horn cards with thistles in carding wool. Merchants who traveled all over the world and saw new selling opportunities and therefore kept encouraging the manufacturers to increase their production and improve their methods. Factory owners united to present suggestions to Parliament. Manufacturing broke loose from traditional confines in several ways. Manchester had no municipal corporation and was still under the jurisdiction of a manor court. It sent no representative to the House of Commons. Several legal decisions had declared seven years practice of a trade as good as an apprenticeship. Company remained in force as its masters used their great manual skill to make cutlery in their own homes with the help of their children and apprentices. Trades in some towns which had guild regulations that had the force of law hung on to their customs with difficulty. Journeymen in factories could no longer aspire to become masters of their trade and no longer socialized with their employers. Hard and fast rules replaced the freedom of the small workshops. Each worker had his allotted place and his strictly defined and invariable duty. Factory hours were typically fourteen hours or more. They had strike funds and went on strike in 1749. Their bloody brawls caused the military to intervene. Colchester weavers accused their employers of taking on too many apprentices. Gloucester weavers protested against men being employed who had not served their apprenticeship. A master tailor paying more shall forfeit 5 pounds. A journeyman receiving more shall be sent to the House of Correction for 2 months. Justices of the Peace may still alter these wages and hours depending on local scarcity or plenty. There was much seasonal fluctuation in their trade as there was in all trades. Foremen were excluded from wage control. Their work hours were lowered to from 6 a. The penalty was prison or hard labor at a House of Correction for three months without bail. Justices of the Peace were to determine the rates of wages of wool workers according to numbers of yards. But this was repealed the next year to prevent combinations of workers. Wage agreements between clothiers and weavers were declared binding. Clothiers not paying wages within two days of delivery of work shall forfeit 40s. A battalion of guards had to take possession of the area. Westminster to stop the import of French silks. A battle between soldiers and silk weavers at their meeting place resulted in several men on both sides being killed. London are to be regulated by the Mayor and Justices of the Peace. Foremen were excluded. No silk weaver may have more than two apprentices or forfeit 20 pounds. Journeymen weavers entering into combinations shall forfeit 40s. Also the low cost of imported goods would motivate the invention of machines in the nation which would be even more efficient in manufacturing these goods. But English manufacturers were still suspicious of free trade. Making beer and distilling gin from barley were widespread. The pastimes of gambling and drinking were popular with all classes. Drunken gentlemen played pranks such as imitating a woman in distress or throwing a person in a horse trough. A person could get drunk for a few pence. Gambling with cards was a popular pastime after dinner. Gentlemen often took their coachmen with them to public events such as cricket matches. Tennis was a sport of the wealthy classes. There was horse racing on any open ground to which people brought their horses to race. Jockeys tried to unseat each other. Hunting of rabbits and then foxes replaced deer hunting. Bedlam to watch for a fee the insane being flogged. People went to the Tower to try to get a glance at a famous prisoner looking through a window or taking a walk along the battlements. In 1769 was the first circus. Circuses included feats of horsemanship and clowns. In winter there was ice skating with blades and sliding. The right of public access to St. James Park became entrenched by the 1700s. There was steeple chasing as of 1752. Men often spent Sunday in a tavern. Then the poor engaged in food riots. English with starvation. The poor often went from parish to parish seeking poor relief. Settled people tended to fear wandering people. Parishes sought to keep down their poor rates by devices such as removing mothers in labor lest the infant be born in the parish. Some farmers hired laborers for only fifty one weeks and some apprentices were bound by means other than indenture so that they could not establish settlement in that parish. Laborers who came to work in industries were refused settlement and sent back to their original parishes whenever they seemed likely to become dependent on the rates. The poor refusing such lodging could not then get relief. Many of the poor starved to death. Charitable organizations gave to the poor and set up all day Sunday schools to set wayward children on a moral path. The Sunday schools could accommodate children who worked during the week. Punishment of children by parents or others could be by whipping or even sitting in stocks. About half of the people were dependent on poor relief or charities. Desertion by a man of his family was a common offense. Parishes providing upkeep for the family sent men to find the errant husbands. The parish would ask unmarried mothers who was the father of their child and then force him to marry her or pay for the upkeep of the child. He often made a bargain with the parish to release him of his obligation for a sum of money paid to the parish. Street vendors who sold liquors had to forfeit 10 pounds. There were riots in London against this statute and its new duties. Also licenses were restricted to people who were certified by four reputable and substantial householders to be of good fame and sober life and conversation. Sellers had to maintain good order in their premises or forfeit 10 pounds. The punishment for the second offense was whipping and imprisonment. That for the third offense was transportation. The punishment for the second offense was whipping and imprisonment. That for the third offense was transportation. Half the forfeiture was to go to the suer. The informer system for enforcing laws had its drawbacks. Informers were not trained and were sometimes retaliated against for informing. Sometimes this meant being tortured to death. Also he might inform on his companions to get the reward for informing or to punish a troublesome one. Sometimes the owner of goods was involved in a fake robbery. Englishmen associated a police force with French tyranny. Bow Street magistrates. This first police district made an impact on the increasing violence of the times. They now taught arithmetic as well as reading and writing. Latin and English grammar. There were usually two boys to a bed. There was bullying and initiation ceremonies such as tossing small boys up from a held blanket or having younger boys run naked in the snow. There were occasional rebellions by the boys and fights with the townspeople. Flogging with a birch or caning with a rod until blood was drawn from the bare buttocks was the usual punishment. But there was more bulling of small boys by large boys at these schools and the smaller boys became menial servants of their seniors. Occasionally there were student riots. Dissenting academies were established for those who did not pass the religious tests of the grammar schools. Pencils were now in use. Paris and a protestant French university. The students went in groups with tutors. On these tours there was often misbehavior such as drinking and fighting. Travelers Checks were developed for those on the Grand Tour. The universities began to teach science. Oral and written examinations began to replace disputations. Few professors lectured. Dissenters were excluded from universities as well as from offices and grammar schools. The Inns of Court had ceased to provide residence. The period of education at law school at the Inns of Court was now reduced in 1760 from seven to five years for ordinary students and to three years for graduates of Oxford or Cambridge Universities. Most landed families tried to ensure that at least one member of the family in each generation was educated at the Inns of Court after going to Oxford or Cambridge. So it was hard for an ordinary person to find an impartial attorney or to find any attorney willing to contest a powerful family. The first encyclopedia came into existence in 1728. In 1740 was the first public circulating library in London. Samuel Johnson put together the first dictionary in 1755. It standardized spelling and pronunciation. Joseph Addison wrote essays on social behavior. Many schoolmistresses wrote textbooks on a variety of subjects. He claimed that the people have a right to control the proceedings of Parliament. Religious issues even became a matter of indifference. Babies had rattles and teething rings. Iliad and Odyssey made him financially independent. He collected advance payments from subscribers who would be listed in the book. There was a growing popularity of novels. Books were expensive to buy. Regular magazines on the new and strange were published. Newspapers increased in number from 8 founded in 1700 to a total of 25 in 1727. Workmen usually began their day by reading a newspaper at a coffee house. Authors of books which have been registered at the Stationers Hall shall have the sole liberty of printing and reprinting such book for 14 years. Winchester were given in perpetuity a copyright in books given or bequeathed to them. Italian opera was introduced in 1706 by Georg Handel on his visit to England. His music became the standard music of Georgian England. The Academy of Ancient Music was founded in 1710. It set the standard of selection and performance. Orchestras had at least thirty members. Many hymns were written. Painting by artists developed. Gentlemen had portraits painted of their horses and dogs as well as of family. Joshua Reynolds painted the wealth and beauty of England. Scenery was painted for the theater. Places of business had signs painted which portrayed animals. Coaches were painted with mythological creatures and such. The first public exhibition of paintings was in 1760. The Society of Artists was formed in 1761 and incorporated by royal charter in 1765. The Royal Academy of London was founded in 1768 to merge all private academies and societies into one official body and to recognize the best artistic work. Joshua Reynolds was its first president. It was at first financed by the king. Palladian architecture came into vogue. Architects took students. Copiers had to forfeit 5s. They learned English to read English literature such as Shakespeare. No longer were France and Italy the only centers of culture and influence on other nations. England was the leading sea power by far. The Royal Society was still the principal focus of scientific activity. Issac Newton was its President for several years and drew in more foreigners. Papers given there generated much discussion at its meetings. Newton opined that particles attract each other by some force in a similar way that large bodies attracted each other. Also there were local associations and societies. These made possible weather forecasting. In 1718 the French chemist Etienne Geoffroy published a table of affinities among chemical substances. Stephen Hales discovered the ways that water that plants lost by evaporation was restored by the roots up the stems. He found that gas could be obtained from plants by dry distillation and invented a way to collect gases by heating certain substances. This saved many lives in the prisons. Jamacia while physician to its governor. He became physician to George II and was a benefactor to many hospitals and devised a botanic garden in London for the Society of Apothecaries. He determined that Atlantic coastal storms traveled from the southwest to the northeast. He explained the behavior of gases with changing pressure and temperature. He did this by using a balance to weigh alkalis before and after exposure to heat. They lost weight by losing carbon dioxide. Plants were thought to remove phlogiston from the air and therefore burned when they were dry. He got interested in the study of gases by watching the process of fermentation in a brewery next to his house. His gas collection techniques enabled him to work with gases soluble in water. Static electricity was being discerned. Experiments showed that a glass rubbed in vacuo would shine brightly and that an exhausted glass globe rapidly whirled on a spindle and rubbing against the hand produced a brilliant glow. Electricity was stored in an early type of capacitor. This countered the theological belief that thunder and lightning were signs of divine displeasure or the work of the devil. English church was erected. Franklin theorized that there were electric charges everywhere and designated them as positive or negative. Louis LaGrange from France developed differential equations. Natural history museums were established. A group split off from the Royal Society to show collections of curiosities. Coal was a remote possibility. Coal contained sulphur compounds which caused the iron ore to deteriorate. He made iron goods of such quality as those previously imported. Richard Reynolds replaced the wooden rails connecting a blast furnace to mines with cast iron rails. Reynolds was in charge of the ironworks. He cast cylinders of the early steam engines. He did this by using leaden chambers instead of glass globes to collect the vapor from burning nitre and sulphur over water. But flooding in his mines and further ventures resulted in his ruin and bankruptcy. He was aware of the problem of flooding of mines and the awkward system of pumps which were used one above the other and were powered by teams of horses. He made a very valuable contribution to power generation by inventing the atmospheric pressure steam engine around 1712. First cold water was poured on a cylinder in which a piston could move up and down. This caused steam inside the cylinder to cool and condense into water. The vacuum created inside the cylinder under the piston caused atmospheric pressure on top of the piston to push the piston down. The piston was attached by a rod to the end of a beam which end then swung down from a point on a vertical stand to which it was attached. Then steam from water heated in a boiler under and communicating with the cylinder was allowed into the cylinder under the piston. This decreased the atmospheric pressure on the piston from above and allowed the piston to rise by a counterweight on the rod over and connecting to the pump. Then the boys were replaced by the valves being connected to the oscillating beam which caused them to open and close at perfectly regular intervals. A story gives the credit for this improvement to an inventive valve boy who wanted to play with his friends. One such engine developed power equivalent to fifty horses working at one sixth the cost. It was the first automatic machine since the clock. Then James Watt invented the steam engine which used steam as a force acting on the piston. Watt made his living making scientific instruments for Glasgow University. He saved this heat energy by having the steam condensed in another vessel distinct but connected to the cylinder. This condenser was kept constantly cool by cold water. A steam pump could pump water from the bottom of the watermill to the top to be used again. The price of the engine was set as the amount of money saved on fuel costs in the first three years of its operation. In 1766 he made it possible to transport coal out of mines on rail wagons drawn by horses. It would put England ahead of every manufacturing country in the world. These men were essential in setting up the first factories. They were the most imaginative and resourceful craftsmen. They had some knowledge of arithmetic and practical mechanics. They could draw out a plan and calculate the speed and power of a wheel. Metal was superior to wood not only because of its strength but because wood parts were irregular in motion and wore out rapidly. So iron and brass parts came to replace wood and leather parts. Paine got a patent for rolling iron instead of hammering it. Quaker Benjamin Huntsman was struck with the difficulty of finding finely tempered steel for the springs of his watches and pendulums of his clocks. His steel was made at night. His factory became prosperous about 1770 and the excellence of his steel manufacture was never equalled. Steel and wrought iron was scarce and expensive. He feigned sleep while watching the whole process. Silver was plated over copper from 1751. White metal from tin and antimony was used from about 1770. The brass industry was beginning to produce brass from copper and zinc that was as good as foreign brass. Chinese or Dresden porcelain. The Fanmakers were incorporated in 1709. A free market for fish was established in Westminster to supplement the free fish market in London to prevent forestalling and monopolizing of the fish industry and to increase the number of fishermen. Duties for its maintenance were paid by the fishermen. Certain men were given the right to incorporate fisheries of white herring for twenty one years to improve the fisheries and give employment to the poor. There were restrictions on taking fish from rivers during their breeding season. In the 1760s the first cooking school was established by Mrs. Chimney sweeps also had warty skin cancer from their bodies being habitually covered with soot and the lethal cancer of the scrotum. Heavy work weakened many bodies and caused hernias. Bending over work for long hours caused stooped posture and hump backs. The association between dirt and disease was just beginning to be made. The principles of infection and hygiene were not well understood. Bathing every couple of months was not unusual. There was some theological feeling that cleanliness betokened pride and filthiness humility. Most houses had a bathtub that could be placed beside the fire in a bedroom. Dysentery and diarrhea made death commonplace especially in the summer when flies transmitted bacteria from filth to food and the water was its most foul. I pray the Lord my soul to take. Thyphus spread easily in hospitals and gaols where vermin could live in the beds made of wood. Colds and toothache were also common. London had almost double the mortality rate of the nation. Ten or twelve children with three or four surviving was a common family pattern. London kept their children in the country for their better health. Sometimes a blister or irritant was applied to the skin to draw out the evil humors. Cupping was used to provide suction to remove pressure from various parts of the body. Opium was given to deaden pain. There were about 70 drugs in use. A physician attended surgeries to give advice. Physicians could visit apothecary shops once a year and throw away any drugs falling below an arbitrary standard of excellence. In 1703 the House of Lords decided a jurisdictional contest between the College of Physicians and the Society of Apothecaries. The poor sought advice from apothecaries. There was progress in health. Scurvy virtually disappeared as a cause of death due to the eating of more vegetables. She led the way by having herself and her son inoculated. Theologicians denounced this practice as a diabolical interference with disease sent by Providence for the punishment of sin. He also published an anatomy book and treated certain kinds of blindness by forming an opening in the eye to serve as an artificial pupil. Nutritional deficiency diseases were beginning to be understood. He published his methods of prevention and cure of malarial fevers and his method of disinfecting ships with the smoke of wood and gunpowder. In 1761 Giovanni Morgagni from Italy opined that disease resulted from a breakdown of organs and tissues that was viewable on autopsy. Bernoulli showed that the living human body constantly changes so that all its particles are renewed in a certain number of years. His book of 1728 described methods and instruments. The next year physicians began to replace midwives. It was besieged by women with babies in their arms. London who were to be paid at least 2s. At this time there were several maternity hospitals. Forceps existed for difficult deliveries. Coitus interruptus was widely used for birth control. There were also clandestine abortions and intentional neglect of newborns. Melancholy was widespread. Suicides were frequent and drugs were sold for this purpose. There were many private lunatic asylums. A lunatic who was furiously mad and dangerous was required to be safely locked up or chained in his place of settlement. Royal College of Physicians or forfeit 500 pounds. A Justice of the Peace and a physician inspected all madhouses to observe conditions and care of patients there. In 1712 was the last time a monarch touched a person to cure him of a malady such as scrofula. In 1743 surgery students began to dissect corpses with their own hands to better learn anatomy. The penalty for rescuing the corpse of a murderer was to suffer death. The progress of science was seen to threaten the authority of the church. They stressed good works and benevolence. But many Protestant clergy were more concerned with their own livings than with their parishioners. They were indolent and did not set a good example of moral living. Freemasonry spread and swiftly provided a spiritual haven for those who believed in God and desired ritual and mysticism. John Wesley became the leader of the Methodist religious movement for the mining and industrial laborers. The movement was called Methodist because of its methodical regularity of living. It was characterized by an evangelical revival and a promise of individual salvation. Wesley believed in witchcraft and in magic. He opined that bodily diseases and insanity could be caused by devils and some dreams are caused by occult powers of evil. Wesley preached in the open air where all who wanted to attend could and also could wear whatever clothes they had. Some Justices of the Peace drafted preachers into the army or navy as vagabonds. Methodist revival imbued energy and piety into the lethargic clergy of the established church. A new moral enthusiasm and philanthropic energy grabbed the nation. Evangelist George Whitfield preached Calvinism and it split off from Methodism. Calvinism went into full decline. Presbyterianism collapsed into unitarianism and there was a general tendency towards deism. Church sanctuary was abolished for those accused of civil offenses. It was not unusual for a coach to bog down or overturn. Sometimes it had to detour around an impassable stretch of road or borrow a couple of oxen from a nearby farm to get out of a quagmire. Men and horses drowned in some of the potholes. Robbery was endemic and some of the roads were so unsafe from highwaymen that bands of armed horsemen were hired to accompany the coaches. It was not unusual to come across gibbets for hanging at crossroads. Traveling merchants preferred packhorses to carts because they could cross overland or through watercourses more easily. These pack horses traveled in regular caravans in single file. Carts traveled about two miles an hour. The toll booths were frequently attacked by riotous mobs. So anyone pulling down or destroying turnpike gates at which tolls are to be paid shall go to prison or put to hard labor in a House of Correction for three months without bail. Later the penalty of prison up to three years was added as an alternative. The hundred was to pay the damages up to 20 pounds. There was no travel on Sundays until 1750. Marsh lands were drained. Harbors were deepened. There were numerous statutes trying to adjust the needs of travel with the condition of the roads. Then broad and smooth iron tires were observed to not cause the amount of damage as did narrow or irregular iron tires and their use was encouraged. The surveyor was to be chosen locally for a year and could be given an allowance. New roads required the consent of the landowners and a negotiated price. Anyone leaving an empty cart or other obstruction on a public highway shall forfeit up to 20s. Letter rates within 80 miles of London were 3d. Within 60 miles of New York City in America there were 4d. Letters were still carried by post horses. Horses or men hauled the barges from the land. Now goods of many inland towns cheapened and reached a national instead of just a local market. He kept the line of the canal at one level to avoid having to make locks. It crossed one river as a forty foot high aqueduct. Coal at the destination point of Manchester fell to half its former price. The Bank of England provided a safer deposit and lower interest than goldsmiths or scriveners. Check use was still formal and rare. Promissory notes are assignable and endorsable and the holder may recover against the signer or any endorser as is the case with bills of exchange. Cash was to be used instead. This South Sea Company was established in 1711 with a monopoly to trade in South America. The prospects of hugh profits sent the share prices soaring. There was also an increase in the money supply. These factors led to a speculation bubble in 1720 in this stock. The total capital invested in all these enterprises rose to over five times the cash resources of all Europe. South Sea stock had gone up to 1050 pounds and back down again to 120. It also redistributed wealth. A result of this bubble burst was the chartering of two corporations for marine insurance and prohibition of such by any partnership or firm. America or the Baltic. In 1717 the gold guinea was assigned a value of 21s. These excise taxes were no longer levied. Duties were placed on items for encouraging industries within the country and to pay the expenses of government. There were more and higher duties to pay for war. Indian corn were also dropped. There are 8 bushes in a quarter. A window tax replaced the hearth tax. For pamphlets and newspapers made in the realm there was a duty of 2d. The penalty for nonpayment was 10 pounds for sellers and 5 pounds for those writing or printing on the paper. A parson marrying a couple without publishing banns or license could forfeit 100 pounds. Not paying duties was punishable by various forfeitures of money. Justice of the Peace setting forth the grounds of such suspicion. A special warrant could be issued authorizing the officer to seize such goods. County militias could be raised and called out to march together in order to be better prepared to suppress insurrections or invasions. Quakers could provide a substitute or pay money to defray expenses of a substitute for three years. This militia act was due to an invasion scare in 1756 because Great Britain then had no allies on the continent. The militia act of 1757 was designed to reassure squires they would not be used as adjuncts to the army. Only those with much property would be officers. Enlistees could still carry on their trades and jobs. Costs were to be from general taxation rather than by locality. But it was almost impossible to get officers and there were many riots when parish authorities tried to draw up lists of those liable to serve. In 1759 the navy prevented French invasion. Volunteers who enlist shall be paid 40s. King George II was the last king to lead his troops into battle. Parliament were exempted. Whipping was the usual punishment for offenses. A soldier who deserted or joined in any mutiny or sedition in the royal army within the realm was to suffer death or any other punishment determined by court martial. The towns protested and town magistrates imposed severe penalties for small offenses by soldiers. Their drunkenness and violence were not tolerated as it was for ordinary people. The Royal Hospital gave pensions to maimed and worn out soldiers treated there. This indenture to the masters or owners of ships lasted until the boy reached 21. No such apprentice could be impressed into royal sea service until 18 years of age. Boys voluntarily binding themselves to such sea service were exempt from impress for the next three years. This was to increase the number of able and experience mariners and seamen for the royal navy and for the trade and commerce of the nation. Such agreement must be signed by the seamen. There were some ships of 2000 tons. The steering wheel had been introduced because a sudden heavy sea could wrest a tiller from the hands of the helmsman. The length of ships was still determined by the same length of trees that could be grown. Sailing ships were still vulnerable to a lee shore. Latitude was easy to determine using an octant and later a sextant with mirrors and a small telescope to measure the angle between a celestial body such as the sun or north star and the horizon. But longitude could not be determined with any degree of accuracy. There were so many shipwrecks on this account that the government offered a reward to anyone who found a way to measure longitude accurately. There was a toll on ships entering the port of London to pay for repairs to its walls. In 1729 the Naval Academy was established. Boys entered at age 13 to 16 and spent two or three years there. Navy over more gaol time for debt. Press gangs seized men in the port towns and from ships coming into harbor. Marine Society was founded for training and placing poor boys in work in naval and merchant ships. These boys usually became reliable and obedient sailors. The amount of flogging due for each offense rose over time. Many sailors had scurvy or other deficiency diseases. Navy until about 1800. Many more sailors died from these diseases than from battle. Rum and water was a daily ration introduced in 1745. Prize money from conquered ships was substantial. There was also bounty money for enemy ships taken or destroyed. Any seaman volunteering for the navy shall receive a bounty of 3 pounds. No seaman in a merchant ship is to receive more than 35s. The time of service was limited to five years if the serviceman so demanded. Worn out and decrepit seamen no longer being treated at the Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich are to receive a pension as determined by the hospital. Navy used blockading tactics and attack by fireships grew obsolete. A person who defacing the marks on goods or hindering the saving of the ship had to pay double satisfaction to the person aggrieved and spend 12 months at hard labor in a House of Correction. The owner of the island of Skerries was allowed to erect a lighthouse and charge passing ships other than Navy ships 1d. Any pilot losing a ship may no longer be a pilot. There must be at least 120 qualified pilots. The prices of piloting are 3 pounds 10s. Exchequer and to have sufficient ready money to pay for losses insured by them. They were to raise capital stock and could make calls of money from their members in proportion to their stocks for any further money required. The owners of ships are not liable for losses by reason of theft without their knowledge by the master or mariners of goods beyond the value of the ship. This is to prevent the discouragement of owning ships. The insurance of merchant ships must give salvage rights to the insurer. A lender on bottomry shall have benefit of salvage. No waterman carrying passengers or goods for hire e. Also he may not keep the apprentice bound to him. Excepted are boats registered at the guilds of Trinity and of St. The penalty is forfeiture of the boat. The king was authorized to prohibit commerce for one year with any country infected by the plague and to forbid any persons of the realm from going to an infected place. Treasurer as a matter of routine submitted annual budgets to Parliament. He was usually also the leader of the House of Commons and the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Chancellor had become more of a judge and less of a statesman. Treasurer of the Navy. Most people believed that the offices of power and influence in the realm belonged to the nobility and gentry as indubitably as the throne belonged to the king. Privy Council engaged in his duties was punishable by death without benefit of clergy. Privy Council who carried out the work of government. House of Commons or the House of Lords. The king was to act only through his ministers and all public business was to be formally done in Privy Council with all its decisions signed by its members. The king gradually lost power. The last royal veto of a Parliamentary bill was in 1708. Privy Council ceased making decisions of policy. It dealt with Parliament. Crown could create no more. He led it for twenty years and thus became the first prime minister. He was brilliant at finance and lessened taxation. He restored trust in the government after the South Sea bubble scandal. He was successful in preserving the peace with other nations and providing stability in England that led to prosperity. They espoused the liberty of individual subjects. They generally favored foreign wars. Seats in Parliament could normally be bought either by coming to an arrangement with some landowner who had the right to nominate to a closed seat or by buying enough votes in constituencies where the electorate was larger and the contest more open. Politics had become a career. Members of Parliament could not be arrested while Parliament was in session. Commons had to have 600 pounds annual income for knights or 300 pounds annually for burgesses. This did not include the eldest son or heir apparent of any peer or lord of Parliament or any person with the above qualifications. The universities were exempted. Parliament had to have residence for a year. Voters still were required to have a freehold of land of 40s. The oath for alderman or common council elections is that the voter is a freeman of London and a householder in a named ward paying scot of at least a total of 30s. A list of the voters and of persons disallowed is to be given to candidates by the presiding officer. Soldiers may not be quartered within 20 miles of a place of election so that the election is kept free. Queen and the law of nations. The Supporters of the Bill of Rights Society was founded and paid agents to give speeches throughout the country and used the press for its goals. Parliaments were combined into one. The country was known as Great Britain. The last Scottish rebellion resulted in attainder of its leaders for levying war against the king. Delaware became a colony in 1703. It established the Episcopal Church by law. In 1730 Carolina and 1735 Georgia were allowed to sell rice directly to certain lands instead of to England only. America to European ports in English ships without first touching some English port. Great Britain on taking oaths of loyalty and Protestantism. This included Quakers and Jews. America were allowed to volunteer as soldiers in the British army serving in America. There was much competition among countries for colonies. Quebec and then Montreal in 1760 in Canada were captured from the French. The English East India Company took over India as its Mogul Empire broke up. Manufacturing in the American colonies that would compete with British industry was suppressed by Great Britain. There were increasing duties on goods imported into the colonies and restrictions on exports. Foreign vessels at anchor or hovering on colonial coasts and not departing within 48 hours were made liable to be forfeited with their goods. Any officer making a collusive seizure or other fraud was to forfeit 500 pounds and his office. It was thought to be a fair tax because it fell on colonies in proportion to their wealth. The items taxed were to carry a stamp showing that the duty on them had been paid. There were also duties on counselor or solicitor appointments of 10 pounds per sheet. All of the original thirteen American colonies had adopted Magna Carta principles directly or indirectly into their law. The stamp duties seemed to the colonists to violate these principles of liberty. Patrick Henry asserted that only Virginia could impose taxes in Virginia. Schoolmaster and lawyer John Adams in Massachusetts asserted that no freeman should be subject to any tax to which he had not assented. Parliament and Englishmen in Parliament made the laws which affected the colonists. They could not be members of the House of Lords because they did not have property in England. There were demonstrations and intimidation of stamp agents by the Sons of Liberty. Merchants agreed to buy no more goods from England. Boston smuggling had become a common and respectable business. It was the port of entry for molasses from the West Indies from which New England rum was made and exported. London and thereby had become rich. In 1766 Parliament imposed a duty of 3d. These import duties were presented as external rather than internal taxes to counter the rationale the colonies gave against the stamp tax. But these items were of common use and their duties raised the cost of living. These writs of assistance had been authorized before and had angered Bostonians because they had been issued without probable cause. Massachusetts Superior Court had declared legal the issuance of general writs of assistance to customs officers to search any house for specific goods for which customs had not been paid. The general writ of assistance in Boston was good for six months after the death of the issuing sovereign. Massachusetts Superior Court of Judicature to perform the function of issuing such warrants. Exchequer court required. Few judges in the other American colonies granted the writ. Seditious libel trials in England and the colonies were followed closely and their defendants broadly supported. Massachusetts assembly for printing in his newspaper criticisms of the assembly. He was forbidden to print the paper. Harvard College seated its students in class in alphabetical order instead of by social rank according to birth. British goods in protest of the new duties cause these imports to decline so much that British merchants protested. Then in 1773 the East India Company was allowed to sell tea directly to the colonies to help it avoid bankruptcy. East India Company a monopoly. The colonies felt threatened by this power of Britain to give monopolies to traders. Bostonians held a town meeting and decided not to let the tea be landed. This Boston Tea Party was a direct challenge to British authority. Parliament closed the port of Boston until compensation was made to the East India Company. England or another colony for trial when he opined that an indifferent trial could not be had in Massachusetts Bay. Governor to be made without the consent of the council. This was due to the open resistance to the execution of the laws in Boston. Governor after expressing the special business of such meeting because there had been too many meetings passing dangerous and unwarranted resolutions. The commander of the British troops in North America was made Governor. The people of Massachusetts were incensed. They were all familiar with the rights of Magna Carta since mandatory education taught them all to read and write. Every township of fifty households had to appoint one to teach all children to read and write. Every one hundred families had to set up a grammar school. The example in Massachusetts showed other colonies what England was prepared to do to them. This congress met and decided to actively resist British policy. There was also restriction of their vessels fishing off Newfoundland. These conditions were to be in force until the Governors were convinced that peace and obedience to laws was restored. North Carolina and expanded to prohibit all trade during the present rebellion to prevent assistance to them. Bounties were made available to vessels from and fitted out in Great Britain for Newfoundland fishing. The average colonial family had a better standard of living than the average family in England. Many of its top citizenry had reached their positions by hard work applied to opportunities for upward mobility. Excepted are those objected to by a creditor who pays for the maintenance of the debtor in prison. Except that no male prisoner may be discharged during war unless he enlists in the royal army or navy until the end of the war. A default or willful omission shall be deemed felony without benefit of clergy. A bankrupt or other person concealing goods to the value of at least 20 pounds or his books with intent to defraud is a felony without benefit of clergy. A debtor refusing to come to court for examination or hiding assets of more than 20 pounds is guilty of felony and his goods and estate shall be divided among his creditors. Bankrupts excepted from the benefits of this act are those who lost 5 pounds in any one day or 100 pounds in the preceding year from gambling or wagers. Tenants holding over any lands after their term expired and after demand for possession was made shall pay double the yearly value of such to the landlord. Landlords may distrain within 30 days and sell goods and chattels fraudulently or clandestinely carried off the premises by renters in arrears of rent. This applies to goods sold to others privy to the fraud. They may use force if necessary to break open houses upon giving a Justice of the Peace reasonable grounds to suspect and to break open other buildings in the presence of a constable. The renter is to forfeit double the value of such. Attornments of renters made to strangers who claim title and turn the landlord out of possession are void. Chief leases may be renewed without surrendering all the under leases. But the rents and duties of the new subleases may not exceed those of their former leases. Great Britain or the colonies is void if not in writing and witnessed by three witnesses. No witness may receive under the will. The accessories shall be punished the same as if the principal had been attainted. The punishment will be as for misdemeanor by fine and imprisonment. This is to deter the counselors and contrivers of theft and other felonies and the receivers of stolen goods from taking advantage of the former rule that an accessory could not be convicted or punished unless the principal had first been attainted. A person who buys or receives or takes in pawn such goods shall suffer the same penalties. Persons convicted of buying or receiving such materials shall suffer like penalties and forfeitures as one convicted of embezzling or purloining such materials. Leatherworkers were added with a penalty of up to double the value. Like penalties were given for buyers of such material knowing it to be false. One who neglected finishing and delivering such goods because he was leaving this employment were to be sent to the House of Correction for up to one month. House of Correction for three months without bail. Other persons possessing game or keeping a greyhound or setting dogs or guns or other devices to kill game must forfeit them and five pounds. Anyone killing or attempting to kill by shooting any house dove or pigeon shall forfeit 20s. Excepted are owners of dove cotes or pigeon houses erected for the preservation and breeding of such. A later penalty was transportation for seven years. The penalty for a second offense was given as transportation for seven years. Anyone beating or wounding a gamekeeper with an intent to kill any deer in an open or closed place was to be transported for seven years. Anyone who apprehends and prosecutes a person guilty of burglary or felonious breaking and entering any house in the day time shall be rewarded 40 pounds in addition to being discharged from parish and ward offices. Anyone stealing goods of 40s. A person taking money or reward for helping any other person to stolen goods or chattels is guilty of felony unless he brings the thief to trial. American colonies to the use of any person who will pay for his transportation for seven years. Returning before the expiration of the term is punishable by death. Anyone assaulting another with an offensive weapon with a design to rob may be transported for seven years. Persons abetting them are also guilty of felony and shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. Justices of the Peace may authorize constables and other peace officers to enter any house to search for stolen venison. Any person apprehending an offender or causing such to be convicted who is killed or wounded so as to lose an eye or the use of a limb shall receive 50 pounds. Anyone stealing sheep or cattle or parts thereof is a felon and shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. Search warrants were authorized in case of suspicion. Also a notice was put in the newspaper for any owners to claim such. A felon who brought two buyers or receivers to justice was to be pardoned. A description of any goods and the appearance of a rogue or vagabond or idle and disorderly person shall be advertised in a public paper for identification by the owner as stolen. Pawning goods without consent of the owner is punishable by forfeiture of 20s. Maliciously destroying river banks resulting in lands being overflowed or damaged is a felony for which one shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. Apprehenders of such persons bringing them before a Justice of the Peace may be rewarded 2s. Any constable not apprehending such shall forfeit 10s. Persons wandering outside the place determined by a Justice of the Peace to be his settlement may be whipped on the back until it is bloody or sent to hard labor at a House of Correction. British factory beyond the seas. Excluded were performances authorized by the king in Westminster. Persons therein may be seized by a constable. Persons keeping such a place shall forfeit 100 pounds. Later there was an award of 5s. These rogues and vagabonds shall be sent to hard labor at a House of Correction for up to one month. Persons pretending to be lame who beg are to be removed. Masters of ships bringing in vagabonds or beggars from Ireland or the colonies shall forfeit five pounds for each one. This money shall be used for reconveying such people back at a price determined by a Justice of the Peace. A master of a ship refusing to take such a person shall forfeit five pounds. These vagabonds and beggars may be whipped. This is to prevent the provocation of divine vengeance. Backgammon games are exempt. People who lost up to ten pounds in deceitful gaming were allowed to sue to recover this money from the winners. No prize may be under 50 pounds value. Wagers and agreements in the nature of puts and refusals relating to prices of stocks or securities are void. Those making or executing such agreements must forfeit 500 pounds. Those selling stock which one does not possess must forfeit 500 pounds. Brokers negotiating such agreements must forfeit 100 pounds. The punishment for perjury or subordination of perjury is hard labor in the House of correction for up to seven years or transportation for up to seven years. The punishment for altering numbers on bills of exchange or other payment papers is death. It is high treason to counterfeit the coinage. The third offense is felony without benefit of clergy. Bank of England and putting this identification thereon is felony for which one shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. Anyone counterfeiting such mark shall forfeit 100 pounds. Company of Fruiterers. This is to decrease the suits between buyers and sellers. Malt to be sold or exported must not be fraudulently mixed with unmalted grain to lower duties payable or forfeit 5s. Makers of narrow woolen cloths must weave or set in the head of every piece his initials or forfeit one pound. The fulling mill owner must append his seal of lead with his name and with his measurements. The searcher to be appointed must measure such cloths when wet for conformity to standard measurements and append his seal with his measurements. He may also inspect any places he chooses. House of Correction for one month. House of Correction and public whipping. H for household or forfeit 20s. Mayor or Justice of the Peace. Mayors and Justices of the Peace were to determine a fair profit for their local bakers for all the types of bread. Bread inferior to wheaten was not to be sold at a price higher than household or forfeit up to 20s. Sellers of such shall forfeit the goods and 5 pounds per piece. House of Correction for up to three months. This is engrossing and has caused the price of coals to go up. Selling one sort of coal for another is punishable by forfeiture of 500 pounds. Only standard size coal sacks may be used for selling coal and they must be sealed and stamped by an official at the Guildhouse before sale. The mayor and aldermen of London may set the price of coals coming into this port. Justice of the Peace could authorize seizure and sale by officers. The cart driver must give this ticket to the consumer or forfeit 5 pounds. Anyone who willfully and maliciously set on fire any mine or pit of coal is guilty of felony and shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. The cost of repair is to be borne by the hundred or town. Anyone not paying was to be gaoled. Aiders and buyers who knew the item was stolen incurred the same penalties. Justice of the Peace within ten days of the owner or his servants. This person shall account to the Justice of the Peace and may bring a witness to his purchase of the items. The penalty for a second offense is three months in a House of Correction. Evidence of the owner was to be taken. Search warrants may be issued to search for stolen dogs or their skins. Except that good of small value taken without violence shall be punished as petit larceny. The houses of suspect people may be searched by warrant. A reasonable reward may be given to the discoverer. Anyone assaulting a magistrate or officer involved in salvage work shall be transported for seven years. The importer shall forfeit treble the value of such goods. Harborers of such offenders will be transported for seven years. An offender who brings two of his accomplices to justice will be acquitted and rewarded 50 pounds for each such accomplice. English silk industry. Search warrants could be issued. The wearer was not liable. The burden of proof of the place of manufacture was on the person prosecuted rather than on the prosecutor. Persons importing other such cloth shall forfeit it and ten pounds per piece. Persons selling such with a counterfeit stamp with an intent to defraud shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. The protective measures for English silk manufacture did not work well. This statute was strictly enforced. Anyone assisting a person who owes or is to pay 100 pounds to try to escape from gaol is guilty of a misdemeanor. Seamen maimed in fighting pirates may be admitted into Greenwich Hospital. This hospital received support from duties paid by vessels of the realm and of the colonies. Masters or seamen not fighting shall forfeit their wages and spend 6 months in prison if the ship is taken. Masters shall not advance to any seamen above half his wages since deserting is the chief occasion of their turning into pirates. No more than 600 pounds of gunpowder may be kept in any building in London or Westminster or suburbs thereof. Then no gunpowder could be conveyed by land over 25 barrels or by water over 200 barrels. It was customary for officers to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy to any new monarch. Papists had to register their names and real estates. Commissioners were appointed to make inquiries. Protestant who sued for such. This was in order to deter future rebellions against the king and efforts to destroy the Protestant religion. Church of England will lose office and is barred from any public office or employment. Jews may not refuse suitable maintenance to their children who are Christian to pressure them to convert back to Judaism. In 1712 was the last execution for witchcraft. Black slaves were common for a time in London. Slavery was largely abolished by judicial decision of Chief Justice Mansfield in 1772. A sheriff may not levy more than 12d. No one may cut pine trees that are fit for masts of ship in New England without license by the Queen or forfeit 100 pounds. Anyone pretending to act under a charter and taking subscriptions in Great Britain or the colonies must forfeit treble damages. British hat manufacture. The penalty is 500 pounds. No one in the colonies except present hatmakers who are householders and journeymen may make hats unless they serve a seven year apprenticeship. No hatmaker in the colonies may have more than two apprentices at once. Whaling ships near Greenland were prohibited from returning until their hulls were full. Vessels built or fitted out in America may engage in whaling. No paper bills of credit may be used in New England because such have depreciated. William Blackstone lectured on law at Oxford University in 1753. English law was established. They greatly influenced the American colonists and were the basis of legal education in England and America for years. For actions under 10 pounds in a superior court and actions under 40s. No more money may be taken for bail than the amount at controversy. This is to prevent frivolous and vexatious arrests. Unqualified people acting as attorneys or solicitors in the county court shall forfeit 20 pounds. Exchequer until he has been examined by a judge of such court on his fitness and qualifications and has taken the oath to honestly demean himself and practice according to his best knowledge and ability. The same applies to a solicitor in the equity courts. This shall not exclude persons who have been bound to an attorney or solicitor for four years. No attorney may have more than two clerks bound to him at one time. Court of the Exchequer. The Chief Justices of all of these courts were paid partly from fees paid to the court. These justices were to continue in office even after a king died and could be removed only for good cause upon the address of both houses of Parliament. The officers of these courts were attorneys. Lord Chancellor and the Master of the Rolls. The salary of the eleven masters of the court of chancery in 1765 was 400 pounds per year. The officers of this court were solicitors. Bench and Common Pleas combined. Bench and other common law courts could be appealed to Parliament. The common law courts rode circuit twice a year in five circuits and once a year in the north circuit. So an accused person could spend up to a year in gaol waiting for trial. Few prisoners were granted bail. Compurgation still existed for debt and detinue. Writs of error at variance from the original record or otherwise defective may be amended to correct the defect by the court where such writ is returnable. This is to prevent delays of justice. Justices of the Peace may correct defects of form on appeals to them. Plaintiffs neglecting to go to trial after an issue has been joined may be nonsuited. Being a freeholder is not necessary. No sheriff may excuse a qualified person from jury service for money or other reward. Selection of jurors for each case is to be done by some indifferent person pulling their names from a box. Poor persons may be paid up to 6d. Pirates may not be tried again for the same crime or for a certain crime and high treason. Only in Chancery could there be discovery. The interrogatories were addressed by court officials to witnesses without the presence of the parties or their lawyers. Officials wrote down the answers in their own terms. Most decrees took many years to be made. He examined suspicious persons and issued warrants for the removal of persons likely to become a public charge. Justices of the Peace of the hundred to participate. Quarter Sessions heard appeals from the orders of the individual Justices of the Peace instead of common law courts hearing them by writ of certiorari. Justices of the Peace in rural areas were squires and in towns aldermen. Justices of the Peace were authorized to decide issues between masters and mistresses and their employees who were hired for at least one year. Correction up to one month. Justices of the Peace were authorized to administer any oath for the purpose of levying penalties. No attorney or solicitor or proctor could be a Justice of the Peace unless the locality had Justices of the Peace by charter. Justices of the Peace must be made within six months and after notice to the Justice of the Peace who may argue cause against granting certiorari. Trover more than covered the old province of detinue. Trespass on the case covered miscellaneous torts. Replevin was still used. Covenant remained in use for the enforcement of promises under seal. Account gradually came under the equity jurisdiction of Chancery. The marshal was to keep the prison of this court in good repair from his fees and profits of office. Stuarts to the throne. So many people came that some overcrowded bleachers fell down and crushed about 20 spectators. Property of a felon was still forfeited to the crown. From 1749 on were established special procedures for speedy decisions in local courts in some areas for debts or damages under 40s. Parliament let the inmates out if they gave up their possessions. They could go to Georgia. Wilkes had such papers and was convicted of libel. He countersued for damages due to criminal trespass. The Court of Common Pleas agreed on appeal and put the burden of proof on the persons searching to justify the search warrant. Sometimes they were one and the same. There was much fighting among inmates. The inmates slept on hay if lucky. There were no washing facilities and little light. Counties or friends paid for their bread. The sale of beer was a recognized and legitimate source of profit to the keeper. Sheriffs often kept people imprisoned unless and until they paid all their fees due to the sheriff. In 1772 was founded the Society for the Discharge and Relief of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts for those inmates unfortunate instead of fraudulent or extravagant. Legacies were often made to debtors. There was much Gaol Distemper fever with fatal consequences. Appeals from the colonial courts came to the Privy Council. Judges in the colonies were appointed by royal governors and paid by colonial legislatures. They served at the pleasure of the king. The defense argued for a right publically to remonstrate abuses of power by public officials to guard against violence and destruction of liberties by men in authority. So truth became a defense to seditious libel. Pamphletts describing the Zenger trial and acquittal were published and republished in London and the colonies. Benefit of clergy was available in the American colonies to all who could read and write. It could be used in trials for manslaughter. The penalty for treason was still drawing and quartering. It was a privilege of the peerage to be immune from any punishment upon a first conviction of felony. Hearsay rules and exceptions were developed in the 1800s. Debtors prisons were abolished. The Statutes of the Realm 4. Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation 27. Life and times of Roger Bacon 36. The Works of Alfred 44. Letters and Papers of Richard III and Henry VII 63. The Birth of Britain Vol. World Book Encyclopedia 104. Encyclopedia Britannica 105. Internet Medieval Sourcebook 145. Selected Historical essays of F. United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. License available with this file or online at www. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. Project Gutenberg are removed. License when you share it without charge with others. This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States. This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www. United States without paying any fees or charges. License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. License as specified in paragraph 1. Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below. BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1. PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1. INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www. Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U. The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www. Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Books with only a loose network of volunteer support. Public Domain in the U. Books in compliance with any particular paper edition.